## dedication-1
¶ To the Saints and faithful Brethren in Christ, who have
  honoured my ministry with their attendance, in London
  and other localities of England.
¶ Grace be unto you, and peace, from God the Father, and
  the Lord Jesus Christ.
¶ DEAR BRETHREN AND FRIENDS,
¶ After sojourning in your hospitable land, and
  peregrinating among you during these last five
  years; in the course of which period, it has been
  my happiness to enjoy much spiritual intercourse
  with many of you in your family circles, your
  social meetings, and in the house of God, I feel
  a strong desire again to cross the pathless bosom
## dedication-2
  of the foaming Atlantic, and rejoin my dear friends
  in the occidental land of my nativity; and, in the
  prospect of an early departure from your shores,
  i feel that I cannot present you with a more
  appropriate keepsake, or a more lively memento
  of my Christian esteem, and affectionate desires
  for your progressive prosperity and perfection in
  the Christian calling, than the following contour
  portrait of my regenerated constitution—exhibit-
  ing, as did the bride of Solomon, comeliness with
  blackness; and, as did the apostle Paul, riches
  with poverty, and power in weakness—a represen-
  tation, not, indeed, of the features of my outward
  person, drawn and coloured by the skill of the
  pencilling artist, but of the lineaments of my
  inward man, as inscribed by the Holy Ghost, and,
  according to my poor ability, copied off for your
  edification.
¶ If, therefore, there is anything in the soul re-
  viving and thrilling Christian intercourse we have
  enjoyed together in the Spirit of Christ, and in the
  holy communion with which we have so frequently
  met together in the house of God, mingled our
  ascending petitions at the throne of grace, unbo-
  somed our spiritual conflicts and trials to one
  another, and listened with devotional interest to
  the messages of gospel mercy, and the unfolding
## dedication-3
  mysteries of divine grace, in times now passed
  over for ever, worthy of your cherished recollec-
  tions; and, if the poor and weak instrumentality
  in the gospel of Jesus, of the coloured female,
  whose labours and sojourn amongst you are hast-
  ening to a close, have rendered her an object, not
  unworthy of your cherished recollections; receive
  with cordial and generous courtesy, this small
  token of an esteem and love, which she will con-
  tinue to cherish on a far distant shore, in another
  clime, long as life permits its exercise, and re-
  sume, on our mutual recognition in that renewed
  state of existence, which will be characterised by
  the eternal developments of elevated holiness,
  blissful immortality, and transcendant glory.
¶ My dear brethren and sisters in the Lord. I
  gratefully acknowledge the numerous marks of
  kindness you have conferred upon me during my
  residence in your land. I intreat your prayers for
  my preservation from the perils of the deep, when-
  soever my path may lie through it; and your con-
  tinued remembrance of my pilgrim course and
  ministerial labours, at the throne of grace. I
  affectionately exhort you to walk worthy of the
  high vocation wherewith you are called, shunning,
  carefully, the destructive vices which so deplorably
  abound in and disfigure the Christian community, in
## dedication-4
  this day of feverish restlessness and mighty move-
  ment. Remember, dear brethren, that they who will
  be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and nume-
  rous foolish and hurtful lusts, which will eventually
  drown them in perdition. Cease, therefore, from
  earthly accumulations; but lay up for yourselves
  treasures in heaven. Renounce the love of money;
  for it is the root of all evil. Love not the world; for
  the love of God is not in those who love the world.
  Look deep into the principles which form the under
  current, regardless of the artificial surface-polish
  of society; and abhor the pride of respectability;
  for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is
  an abomination in the sight of God. Deal not in
  tale-bearing; neither be busy-bodies in other men's
  matters. Judge not one another, for your Judge
  standeth before the door. Be not ambitious,
  ostentatious, proud, haughty, morose, or wrath-
  ful; for God resisteth the proud and haughty
  scorner. Be ye, therefore, clothed with meekness
  and humility. Shut not your hearts against the
  poor, but ever remember them; for blessed is he
  that considereth them; and very unlike Jesus is
  he who cherishes a lurking prejudice in his heart
  against the children of need, and stoppeth his ears
  at their plaints. Take heed what you read: as a
  tree of knowledge, both of good and evil, is the press;
## dedication-5
  it ofttimes teems with rabid poisons, putting dark-
  ness for light, and light for darkness; extolling
  earthly grandeur and honour, spurious valour and
  heroism; fixing reputation and character on a false
  basis; and frequently appearing as the panegyrist of
  the rankest principles, and the basest vices. Above
  all, shun an infidel, obscene or disloyal newspaper
  press, whieh is the scavenger of slander, and the
  harlequin of character; the masquerade of morals,
  and the burlesque of religion; the proteus of sen-
  timent, and the dictionary of licentiousness; the
  seminary of libertines, and the hot-bed of sedition.
  Defile not your eyes with the sight of its columns,
  nor your heart with its proximity. Remember that
  you are called to be saints, not politicians and news-
  mongers. Give your cordial preference, therefore,
  to the Holy Scriptures; carefully read, study, and
  digest them, especially the title-deeds of the Christian
  covenant. Endeavour, as far as in you lies, to do
  the will of God on earth, as it is done in heaven.
  Imbibe the sentiments and spirit, the temper,
  disposition and manner of Christ Jesus, your
  inestimable pattern. Cautiously, diligently, and
  habitually observe and obey the directions and
  statutes of Christ and his apostles, that your foun-
  dation may be built not upon the sand of current
  traditions and prejudices, but upon the {prophets?}
## dedication-6
  and apostles, Christ Jesus being the chief corner-
  stone, and that you may become His true and
  finished disciples, perfect and entire, lacking
  nothing, but complete in all the will of God.
¶ And now, dear brethren, I commend you to God
  and the word of His grace, which is able to build
  you up, and give you an inheritance among all
  those who are sanctified. Amen.
¶ Dear Friends, farewell! May the grace of our
  Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
  communion of the Holy Spirit be with you all.
  Amen.
## 1
¶ I WAS born in the United States of America, in the
  State of Pennsylvania, and of religious parents. When
  about six years of age, my mother's parents, who re-
  sided on their own farm, far in the interior of America,
  at a distance of many hundred miles, came to visit us.
  My parents had three children then living; the eldest,
  a boy about twelve years of age, myself, and a younger
  sister. On his return, my grandfather took my brother
  with him, promising to bring him up to the business of
  his farm; and I saw him not again until more than thirty
  years afterwards.
¶ At twelve years of age I was bereaved of my mother,
  who died in child-birth of her twenty-second child, all
  of whom, with the exception of three, died in infancy.
  My father, having placed my younger sister under the
  care of her aunt, then consigned me to the care of
  Pierson and Rebecca Mitchel, with whom I remained
  until I attained the age of eighteen. After I had been
## 2
  with the above-mentioned persons one year and six
  months, it pleased God to remove my dear father to
  the world of spirits; and, being thus bereft of my
  natural guardians, I had no other friends on earth to
  look to, but those kind benefactors under whom my dear
  father had placed me.
¶ But that God whose mercy endureth for ever, still
  continued mindful of me; but oh, what a change did I
  experience in my new abode from that to which I had been
  accustomed. In my father's house, family devotion was
  regularly attended to morning and evening; prayer was
  offered up, and the praises of God were sung; but the
  persons with whom I now resided were Quakers, and
  their religious exercises, if they observed any, were
  performed in the secret silence of the mind; nor were
  religion and devotion referred to by them in my hear-
  ing, which rendered my transition from home the more
  strange; and, being very young, and no apparent reli-
  gious restraint being laid upon me, I soon gave way to
  the evil propensities of an unregenerate heart, which is
  enmity against God, and heedlessly ran into the ways
  of sin, taking pleasure in the paths of folly. But that
  God, whose eyes are ever over all His handy works,
  suffered me not unchecked to pursue the courses of sin.
  My father's death frequently introduced very serious
  reflections into my mind; and often was I deeply affected,
  and constrained to weep before God, when no human
  eye beheld my emotion. But, notwithstanding these
  seasons of serious contrition, my associations with the
  juvenile members of the family were too generally
  marked by the accustomed gaities of a wanton heart.
  Our childish conversations sometimes turned upon the
## 3
  day of judgment, and our appearance in the presence
  of the great God on that portentous occasion, which
  originated in my breast the most solemn emotions when-
  ever I was alone; for I felt myself to be so exceedingly
  sinful, that I was certain of meeting with condemnation
  at the bar of God. I knew not what to do; nor were there
  any persons to whom I durst open my mind upon the sub-
  ject, and therefore remained ignorant of the great remedy
  disclosed by the plan of salvation afforded by the gos-
  pel, and incapable of religious progress. I was at times
  deeply affected with penitence, but could not rightly
  comprehend what it was that ailed me. Sometimes I
  resolutely shook off all my impressions, and became
  more thoughtless than before; one instance, in parti-
  cular, is so rivetted on my memory, that I shall never
  forget it when ever I glance back upon my youthful
  life. On this occasion I was talking very foolishly, and
  even ventured to take the name of God in vain, in order
  to cater to the sinful tastes of my companions; it well
  pleased their carnal minds, and they laughed with de-
  light at my profanity; but, whilst I was in the very act
  of swearing, I looked up, and imagined that I saw God
  looking down and frowning upon me: my tongue was
  instantly silenced; and I retired from my frolicsome
  companions to reflect upon what I had said and done.
  To the praise of divine mercy, that God who willeth not
  the death of a sinner, but rather that all should turn
  unto him and live, did not even now abandon me, but
  called me by an effectual call through the following
  dream. It was a prevailing notion in that part of the
  world with many, that whatever a person dreamed
  between the times of twilight and sunrise, was propheti-
## 4
  cally ominous, and would shortly come to pass; and,
  on that very night, after I had offended my heavenly
  Father by taking His name in vain, He aroused and
  alarmed my spirit, by presenting before me in a dream
  the awful terrors of the day of judgment, accompanied
  by its terrific thunders. I thought that the Angel
  Gabriel came and proclaimed that time should be no
  longer; and he said, "Jehovah was about to judge the
  world, and execute judgment on it." I then exclaimed
  in my dream, "Oh, Lord, what shall I do? I am unpre-
  pared {to?} meet thee." I then meditated an escape, but
  could not effect it; and in this horrific dilemma I
  awoke: the day was just dawning; and the intense
  horror of my guilty mind was such as to defy descrip-
  tion. I was now about fourteen years of age; and this
  dream proved an effectual call to my soul. I meditated
  deeply upon it, my spirits became greatly depressed, and
  I wept excessively. I was naturally of a very lively and
  active disposition, and the shock my feelings had sus-
  tained from this alarming dream, attracted the atten-
  tion of my mistress, who inquired the reason of so
  great a change. I related my dream to her, and also
  stated my sentiments with respect to it: she used every
  endeavour to comfort me, saying that it was only a
  dream; that dreams have nothing ominous in them; and
  I ought not to give myself any more concern respecting it:
  but she failed in her attempt to tranquillize my mind,
  because the convictions of my sinfulness in the sight of
  God, and incompetency to meet my Judge, were im-
  moveable and distressing. I now gave myself much to
  meditation, and lisped out my simple and feeble prayers
  to God, as well as my limited apprehensions and youth-
## 5
  ful abilities admitted. About this time, the Methodists
  made their first appearance in that part of the country,
  and I was permitted to attend their meetings once a
  fortnight, on the Sabbath afternoons, from which I
  derived great satisfaction; but the divine work on my
  soul was a very gradual one, and my way was prepared
  as the dawning of the morning. I never experienced
  that terrific dread of hell by which some Christians
  appear to have been exercised; but I felt a godly sorrow
  for sin in having grieved my God by a course of dis-
  obedience to His commands. I had been trained to
  attend the Quaker meetings; and, on their preaching
  occasions, I was pleased to be in attendance, and often
  found comfort from the word ministered by them; but
  I was, notwithstanding, usually very much cast down
  on account of my sins before God; and in this state I
  continued many months before I could attain sufficient
  confidence to say, "My Lord and my God." But as
  the darkness was gradually dispelled, the light dawned
  upon my mind, and I increased in knowledge daily;
  yet I possessed no assurance of my acceptance before
  God; though I enjoyed a greater peace of mind in wait-
  ing upon my heavenly father than at any previous
  time; my prayer was daily for the Lord to assure me
  of the forgiveness of my sins; and I at length proved
  the verification of the promise, "They that seek shall
  find;" for, one evening, whilst singing one of the songs
  of Zion, I distinctly saw the Lord Jesus approach me
  with open arms, and a most divine and heavenly smile
  upon his countenance. As He advanced towards me,
  I felt that his very looks spoke, and said, "Thy prayer
  is accepted, I own thy name." From that day to the
## 6
  present, I have never entertained a doubt of the mani-
  festation of his love to my soul.
¶ Yea, I may say further than this; because, at the time
  when this occurrence took place, I was milking in the
  cow stall; and the manifestation of his presence was so
  clearly apparent, that even the beast of the stall turned
  her head and bowed herself upon the ground. Oh,
  never, never shall I forget the scene. Some persons,
  perhaps, may be incredulous, and say, "How can these
  things be, and in what form did He appear?" Dear
  reader, whoever thou art, into whose hands this narra-
  tive may fall, I will try to gratify thee by endeavouring
  to describe his manifestation. It occurred as I was
  singing the following lines:—
V "Oh, when shall I see Jesus,
V And dwell with him above;
V And drink from flowing fountains,
V Of everlasting love.
V When shall I be delivered
V From this vain world of sin;
V And, with my blessed Jesus,
V Drink endless pleasures in?"
¶ As I was milking the cow and singing, I turned my
  head, and saw a tall figure approaching, who came and
  stood by me. He had long hair, which parted in the
  front and came down on his shoulders; he wore a long
  white robe down to the feet; and as he stood with open
  arms and smiled upon me, he disappeared. I might
  have tried to imagine, or persuade myself, perhaps, that
  it had been a vision presented merely to the eye of my
  mind; but, the beast of the stall gave forth her evidence
  to the reality of the heavenly appearance; for she turned
## 7
  her head and looked round as I did; and when she saw,
  she bowed her knees and cowered down upon the
  ground. I was overwhelmed with astonishment at the
  sight, but the thing was certain and beyond all doubt.
  I write as before God and Christ, and declare, as I shall
  give an account to my Judge at the great day, that
  every thing I have written in this little {book?}, has been
  written with conscientious veracity and scrupulous ad-
  herence to truth.
¶ After this wonderful manifestation of my condescend-
  ing Saviour, the peace of God which passeth under-
  standing was communicated to my heart; and joy in
  the Holy Ghost, to a degree, at the least, unutterable
  by my tongue and indescribable by my pen; it was
  beyond my comprehension; but, from that happy hour,
  my soul was set at glorious liberty; and, like the
  Ethiopic eunuch, I went on my way rejoicing in the
  blooming prospects of a better inheritance with the
  saints in light.
¶ This, my dear reader, was the manner of my soul's
  conversion to God, told in language unvarnished by
  the graces of educated eloquence, nor transcending the
  capacity of a child to understand.
¶ The love of God being now shed abroad in my heart
  by the Holy Spirit, and my soul transported with hea-
  venly peace and joy in God, all the former hardships
  which pertained to my circumstances and situation
  vanished; the work and duties which had previously
  been hard and irksome were now become easy and
  pleasant; and the evil propensities of my disposition
  and temper were subdued beneath the softening and
  refining pressure of divine grace upon my heart.
## 8
¶ In the year 1808, I united myself in the fellowship of
  the saints with the militant church of Jesus on earth;
  and I can never forget that memorable evening on which
  I went up formally to present my hand to the brethren,
  and my heart for ever to the Lord.
¶ I was received by the travelling preacher, the Rev. J.
  Polhemos. After sermon, he conducted the class;
  in the course of which he inquired if there were any
  persons present who desired to join the society: I then
  arose from my seat, and replied, "Yes, bless the Lord,
  here is one." He fixed his eyes upon me for a short
  time, and said, "Well, this seems a bold champion in-
  deed." He then asked me the reason of my hope in
  Christ; if I enjoyed the evidence and witness of the
  Holy Spirit; if I calculated that I should be able to hold
  out to the end; and many very important questions
  besides; cautioning me against the deceptive imagina-
  tion that the testimony I had given before the brethren,
  which had been witnessed by angels, or my union
  with the church, would alone be sufficient for my salva-
  tion. He then inquired if there existed any objections
  against my admission as a member of the Methodist
  Episcopal Society; and there being none, he entered
  my name into the class book of the society. I then
  returned home, meditating on that which I had heard
  and done, and praying that God would bestow on me
  sufficient grace to enable me to perform all his righteous
  will. Truly, in those days, my peace flowed as a river,
  and the light of God's countenance continually shone
  upon me; my path grew brighter and brighter, and my
  soul was stayed upon his gracious word and promises.
¶ But, notwithstanding this tide of divine comforts so
## 9
  richly replenished my soul, Satan, my great adversary,
  frequently assailed me with various trials and tempta-
  tions, and the young folks often derided me as being a
  Methodist: it was my happiness to be such, and I
  thanked God who counted me meet to be a partaker of
  the heavenly calling. I sometimes met with very severe
  rebukes from my mistress, and I endured her reproofs
  without the exhibition of my former resentments and
  saucy replies: whatever storm arose, I was hid in the
  cleft of the rock until it was blown over. How vast a
  source of consolation did I derive from habitual commu-
  nion with my God; to Him I repaired in secret to
  acquaint Him with all my griefs, and obtained both
  sympathy and succour. At such times, an overflowing
  stream of love has filled my soul, even beyond my utmost
  capacity to contain, and I have thought, when in such
  ecstacies of bliss, that I should certainly die under them,
  and go to my heavenly father at once, from an earthly
  to an heavenly transport; for I could not imagine it
  possible for any human being to feel such gusts of the
  love of God, and continue to exist in this world of sin.
¶ But it was with me as with the great apostle of the
  Gentiles; when I was a child I thought as a child, I
  spake as a child, I understood as a child; but when I
  attained to maturity, I put away childish things. For as
  an earthly father pitieth his children, so does our Hea-
  venly Father pity those who fear Him: they who serve Him
  in the time of peace, He will not abandon in the times
  of war and conflict, which in our probation here it
  behoves us to pass through. He has promised to carry
  the young Lambs in His bosom; and He verified that
  promise, in my experience, in the day of my trouble.
## 10
  Many were the tears which overflowed my eyes, and
  indicated the sorrows of my heart, and which none but
  God was the witness of. There were no persons in the
  house in which I resided, to whom I could at any time
  open my mind; for the knowledge of God was pos-
  sessed by none in that family with the exception of my
  master, and amongst them I dwelt as a speckled bird;
  but the want of suitable associates, and the singularity
  with which I was treated, drove me to God my refuge,
  and proved very congenial to increased intimacy of
  communion with Him.
¶ Prior to my experience of the life and power of god-
  liness, my mistress frequently charged me with pertness
  and insolent behaviour; but after I had imbibed some-
  what of the meekness and gentleness of Jesus, and had
  been instructed by his religion not to answer again
  when chided, then she frequently charged me with
  sullenness and mopishness. This treatment often sent
  me to the throne of grace, to seek the sympathy of
  Him who is touched with the feeling of our infirmities.
  I now felt, bitterly, the loss of my dear mother, whose
  earthly remains had long since been consigned to the
  house appointed for all living, and her spirit made meet
  for the inheritance of the saints in light, in which I hope
  to meet her at the right hand of God. Oh, how often
  do I think of the advantages enjoyed by many young
  people, who are blessed with devout and godly parents,
  and of the little estimation they are held in by too
  many perverse and giddy children, who, instead of
  greatly prizing the grace conferred upon them, resent
  the kind restraints of family worship and attendance
  at the house of God. Some of them, perhaps, may
## 11
  ultimately be led as I was, when their parents are
  gathered to the generation of their fathers, to pine after
  the privileges which they had once despised and finally
  lost. See ye to it, ye careless, giddy, perverse young
  folks, while the light of parental godliness yet illumines
  the house; prize it, imbibe it, conform yourselves to and
  profit by it, that the fervent petitions of your pious
  parents, in your behalf, may be prevailingly successful,
  by the production of a spirit of prayer in yourselves,
  and the bowing of your souls to God.
¶ Before I knew the power of real religion, I was timid
  and fearful when alone in the dark; and if I had recently
  heard of the death of any person, even if it had oc-
  curred at a distance of twelve miles, I durst not go out
  of doors at night alone, from the superstitious dread of
  seeing their apparition, and to pass a grave-yard alone
  was terrible indeed; but when the Lord had spoken
  peace to my soul, by the manifestation of Christ, my
  fear was removed; and my heavenly Father instructed
  me in reference to departed spirits, that if they slept in
  Jesus they would have no desire again to visit this
  world of sorrow; and if, on the other hand, they had
  died under the power and dominion of Satan, he would
  surely retain them safely in his custody, and not allow
  of their enlargement. I thus was freed from the terror
  by night, and dwelt secure under the protection of the
  Almighty.
¶ The place of meeting for the class I was connected
  with, was two miles distant from my abode, and my
  way thither lay near two grave-yards; but, thanks be
  unto God, I had no dread upon my mind as I passed
  them continually on my way to and return from the
## 12
  class meeting; and I counted this as strong evidence of
  a great privilege to a heart renewed by divine and
  omnipotent grace; to God be all the praise! It is to be
  considered that a two miles journey in the more rural
  territories of the United States, is very different from
  the same distance along the streets or well frequented
  roads of England: across the lonely fields, and through
  the dark and hazy woods at night, the way is awfully
  silent and frightfully wild; but these nocturnal walks
  were to me seasons of sweet communion with my God:
  I went on my way rejoicing; fervent prayers and hea-
  venly meditation were to me the very elements of life;
  my meat and drink by day and night. My delights
  were to follow the leadings and obey the dictates of the
  Holy Spirit, and glorify with my body and spirit my
  Father who is in heaven. I enjoyed richly the spirit of
  adoption: knowing myself to be an adopted child of
  divine love, I claimed God as my Father, and his Son
  Jesus as my dear friend, who adhered to me more faith-
  fully in goodness than a brother: and with my blessed
  Saviour, Redeemer, Intercessor, and Patron, I enjoyed
  a delightsome heavenly communion, such as the world
  has never conceived of.
¶ Thus I passed three happy years after my conversion,
  growing in grace and in the knowledge of God. At the
  commencement of my religious course, I was deplorably
  ignorant and dark; but the Lord himself was graciously
  pleased to become my teacher, instructing me by his Holy
  Spirit, in the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. It was
  not by the aid of human instruments that I was first
  drawn to Christ; and it was by the Lord alone that I was
  upheld, confirmed, instructed, sanctified, and directed.
## 13
¶ The persons who become members of the Methodist
  societies in America are first introduced to the class,
  which they attend for six months on probation; at the
  expiration of which, if their conduct has been consis-
  tent with their professions, they are baptised, and ac-
  counted full members of the society. After I had com-
  pleted my six months probation, I was baptised by the
  Rev. Joseph Lybrand; and I shall never forget the hea-
  venly impression I felt on that joyfully solemn occasion.
  Truly the one Spirit of Jesus doth by means of His
  ministers, baptise us into the one body of Jesus. 1 Cor.
  xii. 13. When he said, "I baptise thee into the name
  of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen," I was so
  overwhelmed with the love of God, that self seemed
  annihilated: I was completely lost and absorbed in the
  divine fascinations. The Rev. Divine then added, "Be
  thou faithful unto death, and thou shalt receive a crown
  of life; and, 'Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do
  with all thy might;' for this is the will of God in Christ
  Jesus concerning you." I was now accounted a full
  member of the society, and privileged with the com-
  munion of the Lord's Supper. In this happy home I
  continued nearly seven years, and only parted from it
  when I left my situation.
¶ In the year 1810, I surrendered myself in marriage to
  Joseph Elaw, a very respectable young man, in the
  general acceptation of the term, but he was not a Chris-
  tian,—that is, a sincere and devoted disciple of Christ,
  though nominally bearing His name. Oh! let me affec-
  tionately warn my dear unmarried sisters in Christ,
  against being thus unequally yoked with unbelievers.
  In general your lot would be better, if a millstone were
## 14
  hung about your necks, and you were drowned in the
  depths of the sea, than that you should disobey the law
  of Jesus, and plunge yourselves into all the sorrows,
  sins, and anomalies involved in a matrimonial alliance
  with an unbeliever. This mischief frequently emanates
  from the delusive sentiments in which the female portion
  of the Christian community is steeped. Young ladies
  imagine themselves their own mistresses before they are
  able to shift for themselves; and especially when they
  attain the legal maturity fixed by the civil law. Pride,
  consequential haughtiness, and independent arrogance
  in females, are the worst vices of humanity, and are
  denounced in the Scriptures as insuring the severest
  retributions of God. Isaiah iii. 16—24. The laws of
  Scripture invest parents with the trust and control of
  their daughter, until the time, be it early or late in life,
  when the father surrenders her in marriage to the care
  and government of a husband: then, and not till then,
  the guardianship and government of her father over her
  ceases; and then, formed as she is by nature for subor-
  dination, she becomes the endowment and is subject to
  the authority of her husband. The boastful speeches
  too often vented by young females against either the
  paternal yoke or the government of a husband, is both
  indecent and impious—conveying a wanton disrespect
  to the regulations of Scripture: the fancied indepen-
  dence and self-control in which they indulge, has no
  foundation either in nature or Scripture, and is pro-
  lific with the worst results both to religion and society.
  That woman is dependant on and subject to man, is the
  dictate of nature; that the man is not created for the
  woman, but the woman for the man, is that of Scripture.
## 15
  these principles lie at the foundation of the family and
  social systems; and their violation is a very immoral
  and guilty act. These remarks will not, I trust, be out
  of place here. I now observe, in reference to the mar-
  riage of a Christian with an unbeliever, that there is not,
  there cannot be in it, that mutual sympathy and affec-
  tionate accordance which exists in the marriage lives of
  devoted Christians, when both parties are cordially pro-
  gressing on the king's highway. How discordant are
  the sentiments, tastes, and feelings of the Christian and
  unbeliever, when unequally, and I may say, wickedly
  allied together in the marriage state. The worldly man
  displays his settled aversion to the things of religion,
  and especially against the sincerity and tenacity with
  which his believing partner adheres to them; and on
  the other hand, the believer displays his settled abhor-
  rence of the things of the world, to which he is crucified
  and dead: nor can the strength of any carnal attach-
  ment betwixt the parties, or the utmost stretch of
  courtesy on both sides, ever reconcile the radical oppo-
  sition of their principles. If the saint winks at the
  worldly course pursued by his partner, he evidences the
  weakness of Christian principle in himself, is unfaithful
  to his profession, and perfidious to the King of kings;
  if he reproves it, he involves the household in strife,
  his own soul in vexation, and perils it by wrath. Be-
  sides, the wife is destined to be the help-meet of her
  husband; but if he be a worldly man, she cannot, she
  dare not be either his instrument or abettor in worldly lusts
  and sinful pursuits; if he be a saint, and she a child of
  wrath, she is not his help-meet, but his drawback and
  curse; and in either case she possesses the title or name
## 16
  of a wife without the qualification, viz. that of a help-
  meet. By the Jewish law, the marriage of a Jew with
  a woman of a prohibited nation, was not accounted
  marriage, but fornication, Ezra x. 11, Hebrews xii. 16;
  and it is a very serious impropriety also under the
  Christian dispensation. I am aware that when once
  the carnal courtship is commenced, the ensnared Chris-
  tian fondly imagines that he shall soon be able to per-
  suade his unregenerate companion to think as he does,
  and also to love and serve God with him; and on the
  other hand, the carnal suitor accounts religion as mere
  whimsy and pretence, and flatters himself that he shall
  soon divert the object of his desire from so melancholy
  and superstitious a pursuit; and thus both of them are
  miserably deceived, and miss of that happiness they so
  fallaciously had dreamt of. I am sorry to say, I know
  something of this by experience. My dear husband
  had been a member of the society to which I belonged,
  and had been afterwards disowned by them; but I could
  not regard him as a backslider from religion, for I am
  of opinion that he had never tasted of the pardoning
  love of God through the atonement of Jesus Christ.
  He made me many promises that he would again unite
  with the Church, and try to devote his life to the ser-
  vice of God; but they were never fulfilled. After we
  had been married about a year, he resolved to use every
  means to induce me to renounce my religion, and abo-
  lish my attendance at the meeting-house. It was then
  that my troubles began, and grew so severe, that I knew
  not what to do; but that God who is a present help in
  every time of need was with me still, and enabled me
  to endure every trial with meekness; and when suffer-
## 17
  ing his keenest chidings for my attendance at the
  meeting-house, I kept my mouth as with a bridle, and
  sinned not with my tongue. He was passionately fond
  of music and dancing, and determined to introduce me
  to such amusements; thinking that I should be as de-
  lighted as himself with the merriments of the world,
  and hoping thereby to accomplish his object: but that
  God whom I served night and day, preserved me in the
  hour of temptation, and shielded me from harm. We
  resided about twenty miles from Philadelphia, a city of
  great note in America, and which I had never yet seen.
  An opportunity at length was presented for us to repair
  thither; and my dear husband projected my introduc-
  tion to his favourite resort—the ball-room, on our visit
  to this great city. We accordingly travelled to Phila-
  delphia; and after we had been there a few days, we
  went to take a walk and view the different edifices and
  parts of the city: he then conducted me into a place
  which I quickly recognised as a ball-room; for the
  violin struck up, and the people began to caper the
  merry dance, and take their fill of pleasure. The tones
  of the music and the boundings of the people were to
  me like awful peals of thunder; and all I could do was
  to weep before God. I often think and say,
V "Where'er I am, where'er I move,
V I meet the object of my love."
  Although I was then in a ball-room, I think that I
  never heard a sermon that preached more impressively
  to me than the display I witnessed there, in the din and
  scenery of that vapourish bubble of worldly gaiety and
  pleasure. Well might the wise man exclaim, "All is
  vanity and vexation of spirit!"
## 18
¶ From the ill success of this wretched experiment, my
  dear husband found his expectations disappointed, and
  he never after urged me to accompany him to such
  places,—to God be all the praise! We soon returned
  home; and I continued on my course, blessing and
  praising God for his kind preserving care of me in the
  perilous hour of temptation.
¶ My husband was a fuller by trade; and when the
  embargo was laid on British vessels, all traffic ceased
  betwixt the two nations: the cloth manufacturers in the
  States enlarged their business very extensively, and the
  demand for hands was urgent. By this turn of affairs
  we were induced to remove our place of residence to the
  city of Burlington, in the state of New Jersey, which
  was to me a happy removal indeed; and I plainly read
  the indications of the Lord's goodness in it: for the
  class assembled at a house but a few doors from mine;
  the chapel was also near, and I more plentifully
  enjoyed the means of grace, and grew thereby. Highly
  did I prize these precious privileges, for I grew in grace
  daily, and in the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus.
  With cheerful gratitude and paramount peace could
  I sing these lines—
V "How happy every child of grace,
V Who knows his sins forgiven;
V This earth, he cries, is not my place,
V I seek my rest in Heaven."
¶ I am compelled to omit much interesting and impor-
  tant matter relative to my religious experience and life,
  and pass to the more strikingly eventful points, lest I
  should swell these pages beyond my present limited
  means for the press.
## 19
¶ In the year 1817, I attended an American camp-
  meeting. Oh, how I should like our dear English
  friends to witness some of our delightful camp meetings,
  which are held in the groves of the United States.
  There many thousands assemble in the open air, and
  beneath the overspreading bowers, to own and worship
  our common Lord, the Proprietor of the Universe;
  there all arise and sing the solemn praises of the King
  of majesty and glory. It is like heaven descended
  upon an earthly soil, when all unite to
V "Praise God, from whom all blessings flow."
  The hardest hearts are melted into tenderness; the driest
  eyes overflow with tears, and the loftiest spirits bow
  down: the Creator's works are gazed upon, and His
  near presence felt around.
¶ In order to form a camp meeting, when the place and
  time of meeting has been extensively published, each
  family takes its own tent, and all things necessary for
  lodgings, with seats, provisions and servants; and with
  waggons and other vehicles repair to the destined spot,
  which is generally some wildly rural and wooded re-
  treat in the back grounds of the interior: hundreds of
  families, and thousands of persons, are seen pressing to
  the place from all quarters: the meeting usually con-
  tinues for a week or more: a large circular inclosure of
  brushwood is formed; immediately inside of which the
  tents are pitched, and the space in the centre is appro-
  priated to the worship of God, the minister's stand being
  on one side, and generally on a somewhat rising ground.
  It is a scaffold constructed of boards, and surrounded
  with a fence of rails.
## 20
¶ In the space before the platform, seats are placed suffi-
  cient to seat four or five thousand persons; and at night
  the woods are illuminated; there are generally four large
  mounds of earth constructed, and on them large piles of
  pine knots are collected and ignited, which make a won-
  derful blaze and burn a long time; there are also candles
  and lamps hung about in the trees, together with a
  light in every tent, and the minister's stand is brilliantly
  lighted up; so that the illumination attendant upon a
  camp-meeting, is a magnificently solemn scene. The
  worship commences in the morning before sunrise; the
  watchmen proceed round the inclosure, blowing with
  trumpets to awaken every inhabitant of this City of the
  Lord; they then proceed again round the camp, to sum-
  mon the inmates of every tent to their family devotions;
  after which they partake of breakfast, and are again
  summoned by sound of trumpet to public prayer meeting
  at the altar which is placed in front of the preaching
  stand. Many precious souls are on these occasions
  introduced into the liberty of the children of God; at
  the close of the prayer meeting the grove is teeming
  with life and activity; the numberless private confer-
  ences, the salutations of old friends again meeting in
  the flesh, the earnest inquiries of sinners, the pressing
  exhortations of anxious saints, the concourse of pedes-
  trians, the arrival of horses and carriages of all descriptions
  render the scene portentously interesting and intensely
  surprising. At ten o'clock, the trumpets sound again
  to summon the people to public worship; the seats are
  all speedily filled, and as perfect a silence reigns through-
  out the place as in a Church or Chapel; presently the
  high praises of God sound melodiously from this conse-
## 21
  crated spot, and nothing seems wanting but local eleva-
  tion to render the place a heaven indeed. It is like
  God's ancient and holy hill of Zion on her brightest fes-
  tival days, when the priests conducted the processions
  of the people to the glorious temple of Jehovah. At
  the conclusion of the service, the people repair to their
  tents or other rendezvous to dinner; at the termination
  of which prayers are offered up, and hymns are sung in
  the tents, and in the different groups scattered over the
  ground; and many precious souls enter into the liberty
  of God's dear children. At two o'clock, a public
  prayer-meeting commences at the stand, and is conti-
  nued till three, when the ministers preach again to the
  people. At six o'clock in the evening, the public ser-
  vices commence again as before; and at the hour of
  ten, the trumpet is blown as a signal for all to retire to
  rest; and those who are unprovided with lodgings,
  leave the ground. On the last morning of the camp
  meeting, which is continued for a week, a solemn love
  feast is held; after which, all the tents are struck and
  every thing put in readiness for departure; the ministers
  finally form themselves in procession, and march round
  the encampment; the people falling into rank and fol-
  lowing them. At length the ministers turn aside from
  the rank, stand still, and commence singing a solemn
  farewell hymn; and as the different ranks of the people
  march by, they shake hands with their pastors, take an
  affectionate farewell of them, and pass on in procession,
  until the last or rear rank have taken their adieu. This
  farewell scene is a most moving and affecting occasion.
  Hundreds of Christians, dear to each other and beloved
  in the Spirit, embrace each other for the last time, and
## 22
  part to meet no more, until the morning of the resur-
  rection; and many a stout-hearted sinner has been so
  shaken to pieces at the pathetic sight, as to fall into
  deep conviction of his depravity before God, which has
  ended in genuine repentance and saving conversion to
  Christ. I, for one, have great reason to thank God for
  the refreshing seasons of his mighty grace, which have
  accompanied these great meetings of his saints in the
  wilderness. It was at one of these meetings that God
  was pleased to separate my soul unto Himself, to sanc-
  tify me as a vessel designed for honour, made meet for
  the master's use. Whether I was in the body, or whe-
  ther I was out of the body, on that auspicious day, I
  cannot say; but this I do know, that at the conclusion
  of a most powerful sermon delivered by one of the mi-
  nisters from the platform, and while the congregation
  were in prayer, I became so overpowered with the pre-
  sence of God, that I sank down upon the ground, and
  laid there for a considerable time; and while I was thus
  prostrate on the earth, my spirit seemed to ascend up
  into the clear circle of the sun's disc; and, surrounded
  and engulphed in the glorious effulgence of his rays, I
  distinctly heard a voice speak unto me, which said,
  "Now thou art sanctified; and I will show thee what
  thou must do." I saw no personal appearance while in
  this stupendous elevation, but I discerned bodies of
  resplendent light; nor did I appear to be in this world
  at all, but immensely far above those spreading trees,
  beneath whose shady and verdant bowers I was then
  reclined. When I recovered from the trance or ecstasy
  into which I had fallen, the first thing I observed was,
  that hundreds of persons were standing around me
## 23
  weeping; and I clearly saw by the light of the Holy
  Ghost, that my heart and soul were rendered completely
  spotless—as clean as a sheet of white paper, and I felt
  as pure as if I had never sinned in all my life; a solemn
  stillness rested upon my soul:
V "The speechless awe that dares not move,
V And all the silent heaven of love."
  Truly I durst not move, because God was so powerfully
  near to me; for the space of several hours I appeared
  not to be on earth, but far above all earthly things. I had
  not at this time offered up public prayer on the camp
  ground; but when the prayer meeting afterwards com-
  menced, the Lord opened my mouth in public prayer;
  and while I was thus engaged, it seemed as if I heard
  my God rustling in the tops of the mulberry-trees. Oh,
  how precious was this day to my soul! I was after this
  very frequently requested to present my petitions to
  the throne of grace in the public meetings at the camp;
  and to my astonishment, during one of the services, an
  old gentleman and his wife, whose heads were blanched
  by the frost of time, came to me, fell upon their knees,
  and desired me to pray for them, as also many others
  whom I expect to meet in a happier world: and before
  the meeting at this camp closed, it was revealed to me
  by the Holy Spirit, that like another Phœbe, or the matrons
  of the apostolic societies, I must employ myself in visit-
  ing families, and in speaking personally to the members
  thereof, of the salvation and eternal interests of their
  souls, visit the sick, and attend upon other of the errands
  and services of the Lord; which I afterwards cheerfully
  did, not confining my visits to the poor only, but extend-
  ing them to the rich also, and even to those who sit in
## 24
  high places in the state; and the Lord was with me in
  the work to own and bless my labours. Like Enoch, I
  walked and talked with God: nor did a single cloud
  intervene betwixt God and my soul for many months
  after.
¶ But Satan at length succeeded in producing a cloud
  over my mind, and in damping the delightful ardours
  of my soul in these blessed labours, by suggesting, that
  I ought not to make so bold a profession of an entire
  sanctification and holiness of spirit, lest I should be
  unable at all times to maintain it; and to this evil sug-
  gestion I sinfully acceded, and dilated chiefly in my
  visits on the goodness of God; and much ceased to
  enforce that high attainment, and to witness to the in-
  dwelling presence and superintending sway of the Holy
  Spirit in a clean and obedient heart, which I had so
  powerfully experienced; but alas! I soon proved that
  to God must be cheerfully ascribed the glory, or he
  will not vouchsafe to us a continuance of the happy
  enjoyment.
¶ I write this as a warning to others who may be at-
  tacked with the same temptation, that they may be
  careful not thus to grieve the Holy Spirit of God: but
  ever remember, that we are witnesses of that gracious
  passage of Scripture, "This is the will of God, even
  your sanctification." "For this the Saviour prayed on
  behalf of his disciples, 'Sanctify them by thy truth,
  Thy word is truth:'" and Peter says, "Ye have puri-
  fied your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit:"
  and "As he which hath called you is holy, so be
  ye holy in all manner of conversation." As, therefore,
  this blessed doctrine is most certainly believed by us
## 25
  Methodists, it is both our high privilege and bounden
  duty to manifest it to those around us; and, in default
  thereof, we shall bring clouds of darkness upon our
  souls.
¶ I shall here narrate a very extraordinary circumstance
  which occurred in the family of Mr. Boudinot, one of
  the richest gentlemen in the city of Burlington. The
  Lord bade me repair to this gentleman's residence,
  and deliver a gospel message to him. I was astounded
  at the idea of going to such a man, to talk to him of
  the condition of his soul; and began to reason with
  myself as to the propriety thereof. Satan also suggested
  that a man of his rank and dignity would not listen to
  such a poor, ignorant creature as myself. I therefore
  concluded, that possibly I might be mistaken about this
  message, and that it might have arisen in my imagination
  merely, and not have come from God. I accordingly
  decided in my mind that I would not go to him. But
  oh! how soon did my heavenly Master show me that
  I had disobeyed his high commands, given me by the
  impression of his Spirit upon my heart; for I habitually
  enjoyed so clear an illumination of the divine presence
  and glory upon my soul, a conscience so pure, and an eye
  so single, that the slightest omission would produce the
  intervention of a cloud and an obscuration of the divine
  ray upon my spirit; and thus I felt on this occasion,
  being deprived of the divine ray, and of the peculiar
  zest and nearness of divine intercourse I had hitherto
  enjoyed with my heavenly Father. I endeavoured to
  search out and ascertain the reason, why the lustre of
  my Father's countenance was obscured upon my soul;
  for so manifest was the gloom on my spirit, that even
## 26
  my class leader said, "Why, how is this Zilpha, that
  you appear less lively than you did a week or two
  since?" yet I still remained ignorant of the cause there-
  of; but on the next class evening, one of the itinerating
  ministers presided, and he gave forth the following lines
  to be sung—
V "Jesus, the hindrance show,
V Which I have feared to see;
V And let me now consent to know,
V What keeps me back from Thee."
  While singing these lines, I was led to discover that I
  had not obeyed the call of the Lord, by refusing to go
  to Mr. Boudinot's, as I had been directed.
V "In me is all the bar,
V Which God would fain remove:
V Remove it; and I shall declare,
V That God is only love."
¶ I then laid open my case before my dear minister:
  and I shall never forget the kind and excellent advice
  he gave me upon that occasion. I never durst take
  any important step without first consulting my supe-
  riors; and having informed him of the painful exer-
  cises of mind I had passed through, and of the disre-
  gard I had paid to my heavenly direction, he advised
  me, {by all?} means. to go whither I had been directed,
  and no more confer with flesh and blood; but proceed
  in the course of duty and obedience, leaving the event
  to God, before whose judgment-seat we shall all stand
  to give an account of our stewardship. Upon this,
  I again sought my heavenly Father at the throne of
  grace, promising that I would go in His name, whither
  he had sent me, if He would be pleased to restore to
## 27
  me the light of his countenance and Spirit; and He
  graciously favoured me with the request of my heart.
¶ I then went to the residence of Mr. Elias Boudinot,
  and had access to all who were in his house; and it
  was a day for ever to be remembered; for such an
  outpouring of divine unction took place, as I never
  witnessed in all my life. All other matters were laid
  aside but that of religion; and little was to be seen
  but weeping and mourning. Some of us were occupied
  in praising the Lord, but most of the household were
  weeping the penitential tear for their sins. There were
  company visiting at the house at the time, and when
  dinner was ready, there were none to come and par-
  take of it; we had quite a search to find, and some
  trouble to induce them to come to dinner. One lady,
  who was then on a visit there, had shut herself up in
  her apartment to read the New Testament; another
  was shut up in another apartment; one of the servants
  had locked himself up in the pantry, and there he cried
  aloud upon God for mercy. It was a day of wonders,
  indeed! Oh, that so gracious a visitation might come
  upon thousands of families in England! How sweet is
  the path of obedience! God will bless while man obeys;
  "for what his mouth hath said, his own almighty
  hand will do." I again enjoyed a full measure of the
  Holy Spirit, and kept that sacred, hallowed fire alive
  in my soul; to God be all the praise!
¶ I thus attended to my Master's business in this and
  similar spheres of effort for the space of five years;
  during which period, much good resulted from the
  attempts of so simple and weak an instrument as my-
  self; because directed by the wisdom, and sustained by
## 28
  the mighty power of God. Five happy years, on the
  whole, were they indeed to me; notwithstanding that
  I had many sorrows and grievous trials to endure and
  contend with.
V "Trials must and will befal;
V But with humble faith to see,
V Love inscribed upon them all,
V This is happiness to me."
¶ The bitters of my cup were continually sweetened by
  the smiles of Jesus; and all things went on easy, be-
  cause my heavenly Father took the heaviest end of the
  cross and bore it with me: thus the crooked was made
  straight, and the rough became smooth.
¶ In 1816, I had a presentiment on my mind of a
  speedy dissolution; and felt so confident in this expec-
  tation, that, when in the class-meeting, I could not for-
  bear from speaking in a strain which implied my speedy
  departure. My leader inquired if I was about to leave
  Burlington? Upon which, I opened my mind to him, and
  the train of my feelings; he made no comment upon it at
  the time; and in the week following, I accidentally met
  with a severe fall, by which I was so injured internally,
  as to allow no presage of recovery; my medical atten-
  dant pronounced it impossible that I could live, and my
  friends for many days looked to see me breathe my last;
  but God ordered it otherwise to every expectation.
¶ While I was thus lying with but one step betwixt me
  and death, a dear lady, who was a preaching Quakeress,
  came to see me, and take a last farewell, not expecting
  to see me again in this life, as she was about taking a
  religious tour in the country. She affectionately told
  me she hoped that all would be well with me, and that
## 29
  we should again meet in a better world, though we
  might meet no more in the flesh. But though my reco-
  very was very gradual indeed, yet it pleased God to
  raise me up again; and then, with what renewed plea-
  sure did I sit under the sound of the glorious gospel of
  our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and resume the
  work of my heavenly Master, going forth in his great
  name from day to day, and holding sweet converse
  with my God, as a man converses with his friend. This
  family or household ministry, as I may call it, was a
  particular duty, a special calling, which I received
  from the Lord to discharge for the space of five years;
  at the expiration of which, it was taken from me, and
  consigned to another sister in the same class with my-
  self. How wonderful are the works of the Almighty,
  and his ways past finding out by the children of men!
  I was often so happy in this work as to be quite unable
  to contain myself; sometimes I cried out, "Lord, what
  wilt thou have me to do?" for it seemed as if the Lord
  had yet something more in reserve for me to undertake.
¶ I had at this time but one sister living, who resided
  in Philadelphia, about twenty miles distant from Bur-
  lington; she was the only sister, who with myself ar-
  rived at years of maturity; a very pious woman, and
  she conducted, herself very strictly and exemplarily in
  all her movements: she was so sanctified and devoted
  a Christian, that some persons have informed me, that
  they have sat with her in their meetings, and received
  much edification from beholding the earnest devoted-
  ness of mind she manifested in the house of God; thus,
  "as iron sharpeneth iron, so doth the countenance of
  a man his friend."
## 30
¶ This dear sister of mine was at length attacked with
  a mortal disease, and intelligence of her illness was
  communicated to me. I therefore repaired to Philadel-
  phia; and. on entering the room, I found her so ema-
  ciated and altered in appearance, that I scarcely knew
  her; but in so happy a frame of mind, that the body
  seemed almost unable to detain so heavenly a spirit.
  As I stood by her bed-side weeping, she said,
V "I'll take my sister by the hand,
V And lead her to the promised land."
  Thus I found her; and after staying with her a few
  days, thus I left her, and returned home to Burlington.
  But being pressed with concern for her, I could not
  long rest at home; I therefore arranged my affairs
  there, and taking my little daughter with me, set off
  again for Philadelphia. When I arrived at the house
  of my brother-in-law, I went directly into the chamber
  where my sister was lying; and the first thing she said
  to me was, "My dear sister, I am going to hell." I
  had not either spoken or sat down in the house; but
  upon hearing this, I kneeled down and tried to pray;
  but she instantly exclaimed, "Oh, do not pray, for
  you will only send me the sooner to judgment!" My
  astonishment was immense at finding her in such an
  altered condition of mind; for only a fortnight pre-
  viously she was exulting in the high praises of God,
  completely weaned from all things of an earthly nature,
  and longing to depart to the world of spirits. Many
  kind brethren and sisters visited her, and prayer was
  made day and night unto God for her, that her soul
  might be released from the bonds of darkness; but she
  remained in this horrible state for nearly a week after
## 31
  my arrival. Some of the ministers bade me not to be dis-
  couraged on her account; saying that for they had wit-
  nessed others who had been in a similar condition, and
  had afterwards experienced a most powerful deliver-
  ance. I had never before heard of such a case, much
  less witnessed one; and it was equally as surprising as
  it was afflictive to me; but the Spirit of God at times
  whispered in my heart, "Be of good cheer, thou shalt
  yet see the glory of God." My faith and hope were
  thereby strengthened; yet the sorrowful sight of my
  poor dear sister opposing every effort of the friends to
  pray with and for her, did not a little, at intervals,
  deject and cast me down. Thanks be unto God, the
  hour at last arrived when he was pleased to burst
  through the gloom, and set the captive free. A num-
  ber of the friends had assembled in the house, and we
  joined in prayer together; after several friends had
  prayed, in a moment such a spirit of prayer came upon
  me, as seemed to shake the whole place, as at the
  memorable apostolic prayer-meeting. Acts v. 31. I
  immediately commenced praying; and while thus en-
  gaged, my dear sister exclaimed aloud, "Look up, chil-
  dren, the Master is coming!" and she shouted, "Glory
  to God in the highest, and on the earth peace; for I
  again have found Jesus, the chiefest among ten thou-
  sand. Honour and glory, and majesty and power, be
  given to Him for ever and ever." "Now," said she,
  "turn me round, and let me die in the arms of Jesus;
  for I shall soon be with Him in glory." We then turned
  her over on her other side, as she requested, and awaited
  the event; she then swooned away, and lay for some
  time to all appearance dead.
## 32
¶ What will infidelity say to this? It surely will not
  attempt to charge a sincere and godly Christian on her
  death-bed with hypocrisy; nor can it be consistently
  attributed to fanaticism. The antagonising conflicts of
  Christian faith, and its triumphs through the aids of the
  Holy Spirit over the powers of darkness, as exemplified
  on such occasions, are very remote from the whimsical
  vagaries of an over-heated and incoherent imagination;
  such experience, under certain circumstances, is the
  natural cause and effect of exercise of Christian faith,
  in collision with forces asserted by the gospel to be en-
  gaged in hostile action to it; and it is a fact worthy
  of extensive observation, that the vast variety of men-
  tal exercises and religious experiences of all true and
  lively Christians, in every grade of society, in all ages,
  and in all denominations and sections of the Christian
  Church, are of too uniform and definite a character to
  be ascribed to the wild and fluctuating uncertainties of
  fanaticism: so widely spread an uniformity as that
  which exists in the genuine pilgrim's progress of Chris-
  tian experience, can never be philosophically shewn to
  be an attribute of fanaticism; an uniformity, like that
  of the human constitution, admitting of the greatest
  variety of individual features, yet all governed by the
  same laws; and it may be retorted also, that stubborn
  facts continually prove, in other countries as well as in
  modern Gaul, that no fanaticism is more luxuriant,
  bewitching, and arrogant, than that which inscribes on
  its ensign—"The Age of Reason," and roots itself in
  the soil of infidelity.
¶ After my dear sister had laid in a swoon for some
  time, she revived, and said, amongst other things which
## 33
  I could not remember, "I have overcome the world by
  the kingdom of heaven;" she then began singing, and
  appeared to sing several verses; but the language in
  which she sung was too wonderful for me, and I could
  not understand it. We all sat or stood around her
  with great astonishment, for her voice was as clear,
  musical, and strong, as if nothing had ailed her; and
  when she had finished her song of praise, (for it was
  indeed a song of praise, and the place was full of glory,)
  she addressed herself to me, and informed me, that
  she had seen Jesus, and had been in the society of
  angels; and that an angel came to her, and bade her
  tell Zilpha that she must preach the gospel; and also,
  that I must go to a lady named Fisher, a Quakeress,
  and she would tell me further what I should do. It
  was then betwixt one and two o'clock in the morning,
  and she wished me to go directly to visit this lady, and
  also to commence my ministry of preaching, by deliver-
  ing an address to the people then in the house. I can-
  not describe my feelings at this juncture; I knew not
  what to do, nor where to go: and my dear sister was
  pressingly urgent for me to begin and preach directly;
  and then to go and see the above-named lady. I was
  utterly at a loss what to say, or how to move; dear
  heart, she waited in silence for my commencing, and
  I stood in silence quite overwhelmed by my feelings.
  At length, she raised her head up, and said, "Oh,
  Zilpha! why do you not begin?" I then tried to say
  something as I stood occupied in mental prayer; but
  she said, "Oh! do not pray, you must preach." I
  then addressed a few words to those around me, and
  she was very much pleased with the attempt: two of
## 34
  the sisters then took me by the arm, and led me into
  another room; they there informed me they expected
  to see me sink down upon the floor, and that they
  thought my sister was perhaps a little delirious. The
  next day when I was alone with her, she asked me if
  that hymn which she had sung on the previous night
  was not beautiful; adding, "Ah, Zilpha! angels gave
  it me to sing; and I was told that you must be a
  preacher; and oh! how you hurt me last night by not
  going where I told you; but as soon as you moved, I
  was released." She continued in this happy frame of
  mind until her soul fell asleep in Jesus. The whole of
  this sick-bed scene, until its termination in death, was
  as surpassingly wonderful to me, as a Christian, for its
  depths of religious experience and power, as it was
  afflictively interesting to me as a relative. I have,
  however, since learnt that some other Christians have
  occasionally been known, when in the very arms of
  death, to break forth and sing with a melodious and
  heavenly voice, several verses in a language unknown
  to mortals. A pure language, unalloyed by the fulsome
  compliment, the hyperbole, the tautology and circum-
  locution, the insinuation, double meaning and vague-
  ness, the weakness and poverty, the impurity, bombast,
  and other defects, with which all human languages are
  clogged, seems to be essential for the associations of
  glorified spirits and the elevated devotions of heaven,
  are, doubtless, in use among the holy angels, and seems
  to be a matter of gracious promise on the part of Jeho-
  vah, on behalf of his redeemed people. Zephaniah iii. 9.
¶ I have been very careful, and the more minute in
  narrating the experience of my dear sister during her
## 35
  illness and death, in hope that it may possibly meet
  the cases of others tempted in a similar manner; that
  they may take encouragement from her happy and
  triumphant end. She had evidently grieved the Holy
  Spirit in some way or other, and He had withdrawn
  from her His comforting presence for a time; but He
  returned to her again with abundant mercy and com-
  forting grace. After receiving a little refreshment, the
  last words she spoke were, "Now I want a good
  prayer;" her husband then commenced prayer; and
  during the exercise, her happy spirit bade adieu to the
  frailties and sorrows of this mortal life, prepared for,
  and assured of, her title to a jointure in the ever-bloom-
  ing glories of the inheritance of the saints in light.
¶ Notwithstanding the plain and pointed declaration of
  my sister, and though the Scriptures assert that not
  many wise, rich, and noble are called; but God hath
  chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the
  wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the
  mighty, I could not at the time imagine it possible that
  God should select and appoint so poor and ignorant a
  creature as myself to be his messenger, to bear the
  good tidings of the gospel to the children of men.
  Soon after this, I received a visit from a female who
  was employed in the work of the ministry, who asked
  me if I did not think that I was called by the Lord {to?}
  that work? to which I replied in the negative; she then
  said, "I think you are; now tell me, do not passages
  of Scripture often open to thy mind as subjects for
  public speaking and exposition? Weigh well this matter
  and see; for I believe that God has provided a great
  work for thy employment."
## 36
¶ But still I could not believe that any such line of
  duty was enjoined upon me. Though one intimation
  came after another, and I had warning after warning,
  to prepare me for and urge me to it, I went on from
  one degree to another, without seriously and earnestly
  entertaining the subject; yet I often reflected on that
  which had been expressed by this kind friend, and
  especially on what had fallen from the lips of my dear
  sister Hannah but a short time previously to her death;
  but I kept these things very reservedly to myself, and
  pondered them in my heart, as did Mary the mother
  of Christ. Besides all this, I continually endured such
  sore trials from my poor unconverted husband, as
  powerfully operated to deter me from the thought of
  such an undertaking; but on the other hand, when I
  had been contemplating the wonderful works of crea-
  tion, or revelation of the mind and truth of God to
  man, by the inspiration of his prophets, I have been
  lost in astonishment at the perception of a voice, which
  either externally or internally, has spoken to me, and
  revealed to my understanding many surprising and
  precious truths. I have often started at having my
  solitary, contemplative silence thus broken; and looked
  around me as if with the view of discovering or recog-
  nising the ethereal attendant who so kindly ministered
  to me, Heb. ii. 14; not, indeed, with the slightest alarm,
  though with much wonder; for I enjoyed so intimate
  and heavenly an intercourse with God, that I was assured
  He had sent an angel to instruct me in such of His holy
  mysteries as were otherwise beyond my comprehension.
  Such communications were most gratifying and delight-
  ful to me; yet I had not sagacity sufficient to discern,
## 37
  that, gifted with such an aid as this, I had a sufficiency
  from God for the proclamation of his gospel. 2 Cor. iii. 5.
  Every thing failed to convince me that God had des-
  tined me for the ministry; intimation and qualification
  were alike unheeded by my unbelieving ignorance of
  the will and ways of God; and thus I continued, for
  several years after my sister's death, unmindful of the
  allurements as well as the precepts of God.
¶ As all other means had failed to move me to proceed
  upon my appointed duties, the Lord used other means
  to move me; for when gentle means do not answer,
  the rod must be applied to bring us into subjection to
  our Master's will. In 1819, it pleased God to lay me
  upon a bed of affliction, with a sickness which, to all
  appearance, was unto death; an internal inflammation
  wasted my body, in defiance of all the means and reme-
  dies which were resorted to; and I grew worse and
  worse. The medical gentleman who attended me said,
  he could do no more for me; he was a very pious
  Christian, and his visits were very precious to me; for
  we often held much sweet counsel together about the
  things of God. Real religion is very seldom to be found
  amongst the medical profession; but thanks be to God,
  there are some to be met with, occasionally, who can
  administer comfort to the soul while relieving the ail-
  ments of the body; and thus it was with him.
¶ I had many persons come from far and near to visit
  me, because God was with me; my soul was preserved
  in great peace and tranquillity; but, on one occasion,
  when in conversation with my husband about my death,
  which seemed to be fast approaching, I could not for-
  bear from weeping, from the thought of leaving behind
## 38
  me, in this evil and stormy life, my poor little girl who
  was then about seven years of age. It then occurred
  to my mind, that this natural anxiety which I felt, did
  not comport with an absolute submission to the will of
  God; and evinced the inordinate strength and force of
  those ties by which I was still bound to this earth. I
  then, in prayer, pledged myself afresh to God, begging
  that he would effectually wean me from all the excesses
  of nature's ties; and that my affections and will might
  be brought into due submission to the will of my hea-
  venly Father. I wrestled in prayer against my insub-
  ordinate affections, for about two hours, and the Lord
  graciously bestowed upon me the victory; and I became
  so dead to this world, that I felt no anxiety to give any
  directions as to what should be done for the child after
  my decease. I was perfectly resigned to the will of God,
  and willing either to live or die as he thought best;
  though I could rather have preferred to depart and be
  with Christ, which is far better. While thus awaiting
  the divine disposal, my doctor came in one morning,
  and said, "There is but one thing more that I can try
  for you, and it is a very severe operation; nor can I
  say how it will affect you; but if you wish to try it,
  I will apply it in the name of God;" adding, "that
  it is our duty to try every means for the restoration
  of health, leaving the event to God." I therefore
  consented to submit to the operation, which was, to
  have my side burnt with caustic, and have an issue
  inserted therein. I complied, and the thing was done;
  but it well nigh proved the breaking asunder of the
  slender thread of life. A kind Quaker lady, who much
  visited and attended to me during my illness, being
## 39
  unable to witness the operation, was absent from me on
  that day: when she came on the morrow, I had scarcely
  power left me sufficiently to recognise her; and my ex-
  haustion was so extreme, that I could not even raise my
  hand. I was many weeks ere I recovered from this painful
  operation, and my debility was long protracted; but at
  times the presence of the Holy Spirit was so powerful
  within me, that I seemed quite invigorated and strong;
  and in this illness, I received another striking commu-
  nication in reference to my future employment in the
  ministry; it occurred after the renewed dedication of
  my soul to God as above related. About twelve o'clock
  one night, when all was hushed to silence, a human
  figure in appearance, came and stood by my bed-side,
  and addressed these words to me, "Be of good cheer,
  for thou shalt yet see another camp-meeting; and at
  that meeting thou shalt know the will of God concern-
  ing thee." I then put forth my hand to touch it, and
  discovered that it was not really a human being,
  but a supernatural appearance. I was not in the least
  alarmed, for the room was filled with the glory of God,
  who had permitted the veil to be removed from my
  mortal vision, that I might have a glimpse of one of our
  heavenly attendants,—of one who had a message to
  deliver to me from God. There are many sceptical
  persons who conceitedly, rashly, and idly scoff at the
  idea of apparitions and angelic appearances; but they
  ignorantly do it in the face of the most extensive expe-
  rience, instinct, belief, and credible testimony of persons
  of every nation, and of all ages, as well as the inspired
  statements of the Scriptures. The universal belief of
  mankind in the separate existence of the soul after
## 40
  death, is sustained, not by fanciful speculations, but by
  matters of fact; from facts of this class, this belief
  derives more substantial support and confirmation than
  from all the cold deductions of metaphysical ratiocina-
  tion. Ocular proof is its own demonstration, and com-
  mands a far more extensive currency than logical
  influence. Seldom do the juries of our criminal courts
  establish their verdicts on evidence equally abundant
  and express, with that which is furnished by every loca-
  lity to facts of this description; and the number of
  such facts in the possession of the present generation of
  mankind, or even of each hamlet or parish in the world,
  is astonishingly greater than ever meets the ear of the
  public, or enters into the conceptions of the headstrong,
  heroic, and unreasoning sceptic. From that moment
  I was assured of my ultimate recovery; nor could any
  human assurances or arguments have persuaded me to
  the contrary. Soon after this, one of our ministers
  having heard of my illness, and of the happy frame of
  my mind, travelled a distance of several miles to see
  me; he informed me, that he longed to be in such a
  situation as mine—so near to the gate of heaven. I
  replied, "Brother, it seemeth to me that I shall yet
  see another camp-meeting." He then addressed me in
  a manner that implied, that in his judgment it was
  quite impossible, and out of the question. But from
  the very hour in which the kind celestial messenger
  delivered to me that comforting and assuring announce-
  ment, I began to amend; though my recovery was
  very gradual, and it was a long time ere I was able to
  sit up. Thanks be unto the Lord, my sickness was
  not unto death, but for the glory of God. So sturdy
## 41
  had been my unbelief, that my merciful and indulgent
  God was thereby induced to adopt more severe and
  extraordinary means to bring me into subjection to his
  holy will. My spirit and temper were now subdued,
  and resigned to do the will of God, which I was desi-
  rous to ascertain, but my hour was not yet come; I
  therefore waited patiently until the time when it was
  to be revealed to me, often, in the mean time, saying,
  "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? whatever
  seemeth good unto Thee, give me the ability, and I will
  do it."
¶ Eight months had passed away since I had been
  permitted to attend in the sanctuary of God; but the
  happy day arrived at last, when I was sufficiently reco-
  vered to repair thither again. My kind friends came
  to assist me to go to the chapel, by supporting me on
  each side; and I arrived there very comfortably. A
  minister occupied the pulpit on that occasion, who was
  unknown to me, and preached on the nocturnal visit
  of Nicodemus to Jesus. He spoke with much power,
  and the glory of God filled the house; the people
  shouted for joy, and the whole place seemed in motion.
  Glory for ever! Glory be to God! for his presence was
  manifested on earth. After an interval of fifteen months
  from the time when I received the angelic announce-
  ment, I heard it published in the meeting, that there
  was to be a camp-meeting in five weeks from that time.
  At the moment when I heard the notice proclaimed, I
  felt a sensation as if I had received a blow on the head,
  or had sustained an electric shock. So singular a feeling
  surprised me, and gave rise to much thought; but I
  could not account for, or explain its cause.
## 42
¶ The spot where the camp-meeting was announced to
  be held, was at a great distance from my home; and
  as my long indisposition had borne heavily on my earthly
  resources and entirely exhausted them, I knew not how
  I should be furnished with sufficient means to undertake
  such a journey. My poor husband was extremely hos-
  tile to religion, and had an extravagant prejudice against
  camp-meetings; the bare mention of them usually irri-
  tated him, excited him to treat me with much bitterness,
  and urged him to denounce them as pregnant with all
  manner of evil. However, on my return home, I in-
  formed him of the projected camp-meeting, and of my
  desire to be present at it; and contrary to my expecta-
  tions, he spoke not a word in reply. I was surprised
  at this, but I regarded it as springing from the restrain-
  ing power of that God, who, on one occasion, would
  not permit even a dog to move his tongue against the
  children of Israel as they passed by.
¶ I had been ill nearly two years, and was even then
  unable to help myself; nor had I any apparel suitable
  for me to go into the grove with; and much clothing
  was requisite for such an occasion. I knew not there-
  fore what to do; it would have been useless to have
  applied to my husband for assistance for such a purpose:
  go without more apparel I could not; I was therefore
  quite at a stand to know how to proceed. But God
  took the cause in hand, and made the way plain and
  pleasant; for my dear old master Mitchel, under whom
  I had been brought up, had heard a year back that
  Zilpha was very sick; and though he had received no
  subsequent intelligence as to whether she lived or died,
  yet he thought if she was living, she must by this time
## 43
  be in need of some pecuniary assistance; he had been
  inclined, therefore, to send her a supply of money, but
  knew not how to effect it from want of opportunity.
  However, in the month of August, the society of Friends
  hold their quarterly meetings in Burlington, New Jersey;
  and they are in the practice of taking long journeys to
  attend these meetings; so he encouraged his son and
  daughter to come over to the meeting at Burlington;
  desiring them when there, to search after and if possible
  find out the residence of Zilpha, present his kind love to
  her, and hand her a donation which he committed to their
  care. When the quarterly meeting of the Friends came on
  in our city, to my great astonishment who should come
  to see me, but William and Achsah Mitchel, the former
  companions of my youthful days, with whom I had been
  reared; and as we not seen each other for several years,
  it was indeed a happy meeting; and they came to me
  with presents, as did the wise men who came to the
  infant Jesus and his mother, and presented them with
  frankincense and myrrh; to God be all the praise!
  Then I might have said with Job's friend, "The Al-
  mighty has been my defence; and now I have plenty of
  silver." Being thus supplied, I was enabled to make pre-
  parations for going into the mount of God, to hear his
  holy word; and during all my preparations, my husband,
  contrary to his usual manner, preserved a perfect
  silence. Thus all went on easily and calmly, it being
  the Lord's doing, and it was marvellous in my eyes.
¶ As the time drew near, we ascertained that a consi-
  derable number of coloured people were about going
  thither from our parts; and the members of our class
  arranged for all of them to sojourn together in one tent.
## 44
  But we were as yet unprovided with one, nor did we
  know where or how to procure it. My heavenly Father
  then put it into my heart to go to a friend of mine, and
  ask for the loan of his tent, and I obtained it at my
  request without the least hesitation; and thus all things
  were provided in readiness for the projected journey.
¶ I have been particular in narrating these circumstances,
  to show the ever-mindful care of God for us; and how
  he disposes our matters even when we are unable to dis-
  cern any possible way, or to provide for the exigencies
  which clog up and embarrass our paths. How remark-
  able was it that my dear father Mitchel, who had
  brought me up from my childhood, should, after an
  absence of ten years, be stirred up in his mind to send me
  such a timely relief; and the more especially as it was
  the first favour of the kind that I received from him.
  Oh! let all the powers within me unite in fervent ado-
  ration of the God I love.
¶ At length the auspicious morning arrived for us to
  proceed on our journey to the holy mount of God; the
  carriage soon drove up to my door, and I bade farewell
  to my dear husband. We started off, and it being a
  delightful day, we had a very pleasant journey, and
  arrived on the camp ground in the afternoon of the
  same day. I was very cordially received by the dear
  friends, and the dear brethren in the ministry joyfully
  hailed my appearance on the camp ground; and I
  was promptly handed to a seat to take refreshments
  after my journey. There were thousands already assem-
  bled; but the best of all was, God was there; and much
  good was accomplished in the name of Jesus. Friday
  and Saturday were two heavenly days indeed; the
## 45
  mighty power of God was greatly displayed, and His
  ministers were like a flame of fire; so animated with
  godly zeal. I never saw so much godly effort and
  evangelic exertion displayed in all my life as on that
  occasion. On the Lord's-day morning, the presiding
  Elder stepped forth in the might of the Holy Spirit,
  like Joshua, when he went to meet the angelic captain
  of the Lord's hosts, and said, "Let this day be entirely
  spent in holiness to the Lord; let no table be spread;
  but let us abstain as much as possible from food, and
  see what the Lord will do for us this day; for this is
  the great day of battle against the old dragon and the
  powers of darkness." Oh! what a memorable day
  was this. The public prayer-meeting commenced at
  seven o'clock in the morning; and at half-past eight
  o'clock, dear Mr. Potts preached a powerful sermon,
  under which many souls were awakened to a concern
  for their eternal interests. At ten, the trumpet sounded
  again for preaching, and the presiding Elder preached
  from 2 Cor. v. 20. "Now then we are ambassadors
  for Christ; as though God did beseech you by us:
  we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God."
  When he came to the application of his discourse, there
  seemed not to be one person on the spot, whose eyes
  were not suffused with tears; both high and low,
  rich and poor, white and coloured, were all melted like
  wax before the fire. In every part of that vast concourse,
  the number of which was estimated at seven thousands,
  there were heaving bursts of penitential emotion, with
  streaming eyes; and the mighty action of the Holy
  Spirit, and the quickening energy of God was so
  obvious and exhilirating, that all the sons of God shouted
## 46
  for joy. At the conclusion of this lively and interesting
  meeting, the people returned to their tents to pray with,
  and direct and comfort those who were in the distresses
  of godly sorrow. A number of persons were collected in
  our tent, who were in great distress, earnestly implor-
  ing the mercy of God. We engaged in fervent prayer
  with and for them; and a great noise being made from
  the mingling of so many voices, and of such various
  tones of sorrow and rejoicing, of despair and exultation,
  of prayer and praise, hundreds were attracted to
  the place, and came round to witness the scene, and
  ascertain what was going forward. One of the brethren
  manifested some uneasiness and dissatisfaction at the
  eagerness with which the people came rushing into our
  tent; and I said to him, "Oh, never mind, my brother;
  let them come in and see the wonderful works of God;"
  and I was in the act of pressing through the crowd to
  open the back part of the tent, which I was just about
  to do, when I felt, as it were a hand, touch me on the
  right shoulder; and a voice said to me, "Go outside
  of the tent while I speak with thee." I turned myself
  round to see from whom the voice proceeded; but
  there were none near me but those of our own company;
  and not any of them were addressing me. I immediately
  went outside and stood at the door of the tent; and in
  an instant I began as it were involuntarily, or from an
  internal prompting, with a loud voice to exhort the
  people who yet were remaining near the preacher's
  stand; and in the presence of a more numerous assem-
  blage of ministers than I had ever seen together before;
  as if God had called forth witnesses from heaven, and
  witnesses on earth, ministers and members, to witness
## 47
  on this day to my commission, and the qualifications He
  bestowed on me to preach his holy Gospel. How
  appropriate to me was the text which had been preached
  from just before, "Now, then, we are ambassadors for
  Christ." Our dear ministers stood gazing and listening
  with wonder and astonishment; and the tears flowed
  abundantly down their cheeks while they witnessed the
  wonderful works of God. After I had finished my
  exhortation, I sat down and closed my eyes; and there
  appeared a light shining round about me as well as
  within me, above the brightness of the sun; and out of
  that light, the same identical voice which had spoken to
  me on the bed of sickness many months before, spake
  again to me on the camp ground, and said, "Now thou
  knowest the will of God concerning thee; thou must
  preach the gospel; and thou must travel far and wide."
  This is my commission for the work of the ministry,
  which I received, not from mortal man, but from the
  voice of an invisible and heavenly personage sent from
  God. Moreover, this did not occur in the night, when
  the dozing slumbers and imaginative dreams are preva-
  lent, but at mid-day, between the hours of twelve and
  two o'clock; and my ministry was commenced in the
  midst of thousands who were both eye and ear wit-
  nesses of the fact. Oh, adorable Trinity! dispose me
  to do thy holy will in all things. This was my expe-
  rience on the Lord's day on the camp ground; a day
  wherein the energies of the Holy Spirit were amazingly
  exerted, and His presence circulated; and on which
  hundreds drank into, and were filled with the Spirit.
  It was such a day as I never witnessed either before or
  since. On the Monday came the solemn parting time,
## 48
  of bidding farewell to the brethren and sisters, who
  were about to proceed to their different stations and
  places of residence, never to meet again until they meet
  before the throne of Jesus. Many hundreds of them have
  doubtless, since then, gone to their final rest; and will
  sing the praises of their Redeemer in that world of
  immortality to which we are all hastening; may we
  then hail their happiness; and with them share the
  bliss of the blood-bought myriads around the glorious
  throne in heaven. Having taken our farewell of the
  dear friends on the camp ground, we started for Burling-
  ton; and happily and safely returned home more spi-
  ritual and heavenly minded, and stronger in the Lord,
  than when we came. On my arrival at home, I found
  all well, and things peaceful and quiet; and for a short
  time, I went on my way rejoicing.
¶ But Satan, my unwearied adversary, did not suffer
  me long to remain exempted from conflict and trouble.
  Soon after my return, I laid my case in reference to my
  call to the work of the ministry before the ministers;
  and they greatly encouraged me to proceed, and to
  preach wherever and whenever opportunites offered.
  They saw no impropriety in it, and therefore advised me
  to go on and do all the good I could. I first broached
  the subject to Mr. John Potts, the beloved brother who
  preached at the camp-meeting on the morning of the
  day on which the heavenly commission was delivered
  unto me: and I obtained the approbation and sanction
  of all the ministers and of the society. But some of the
  members of our class soon began to betray a little jea-
  lousy, lest I should rise into too great estimation; for a
  prophet is not without honour, save in his own country;
## 49
  and they began to discover many faults and imperfections
  in me; for three years previously there had not been a
  single jarring string amongst us; and nothing could be
  done without my opinion being first given: in every
  thing I suited them exactly, and we were a very loving
  and happy band: but after I commenced the work of
  the ministry, I was a person of no account, and ever had
  been; and I became so unpopular, that all our coloured
  class abandoned me excepting three. Like Joseph, I
  was hated for my dreams; and like Paul, none stood
  with me. This treatment, however painful, by no means
  damped my ardour in the work to which I had been
  called. I still continued in my Master's work, and great
  crowds assembled every Lord's day to hear me: the
  Lord was with me and strengthened me in my feeble
  labours; the number of white brethren and sisters who
  flocked to my ministry increased daily; the work
  prospered amazingly; and thus I had gone on for two
  months before my husband knew any thing about it;
  for he never went to a place of worship. At last the
  tidings came to his ears, and were tauntingly disclosed
  by one who said to him, "Josh, your wife is a preacher:"
  this important announcement he met with a direct nega-
  tive; but when he returned home, he asked me if it
  was true; and I informed him that it was. "Well," said
  he, "I'll come and hear you, if I come barefoot:" at
  these words my heart leaped for joy; and I indulged in
  sanguine hopes that he might thereby be converted to
  God. He came according to his word; and I think
  that conviction of the sinfulness of his state strongly
  fastened on his conscience, for he became much troubled
  in mind: he was also apprehensive that I should become
## 50
  a laughing-stock for the people; and this also grieved
  him considerably: sometimes he said to me, "Now
  child, we are undone:" it appeared to him so strange
  and singular a thing, that I should become a public
  speaker; and he advised me to decline the work alto-
  gether, and proceed no further. I was very sorry to see
  him so much grieved about it: but my heavenly Father
  had informed me that he had a great work for me to do;
  I could not therefore descend down to the counsel of
  flesh and blood, but adhered faithfully to my com-
  mission; and very soon after, all my friends who had
  forsaken, me, returned to me again, for they perceived
  that God was with me; and many were added to our
  numbers, whom I hope to meet in the realms of im-
  mortality.
¶ My poor husband's health about this time began
  visibly to decline; and his disorder soon settled into
  an intractable consumption: the amount of care which
  now devolved upon me was very great; I was com-
  pelled to work very hard to keep my little family and
  household comfortable in this time of affliction; and it
  was frequently with great difficulty that I balanced my
  income and expenditure; but thanks be to God, he
  opened my way before me, comforted, cheered and
  strengthened me, and conducted me through all my
  difficulties far beyond my expectations: it is true, I
  diligently used every means in my power, and my exer-
  tions were sanctified and blessed by the Lord. The
  worst feature of this affliction was, that my dear hus-
  band yet remained a stranger to the precious blood of
  atonement, and to the Lamb of God who taketh away
  the sins of the world. A short time prior to his death,
## 51
  he indicated a better state of mind than formerly: he
  even confessed the misconduct with which he had be-
  haved towards me; requested my forgiveness, and
  expressed his hope of meeting me in the better world;
  he acknowledged that my behaviour had ever been
  irreproachable; and hoped that the Lord would ever
  sustain me: many other things he uttered of much
  importance; and his countenance assumed such a calm-
  ness and sweetness, that the neighbours who visited him
  observed the change, and spake of it with great satis-
  faction. Glory be to God, who doeth all things well;
  who is too wise to err, too good to be unkind.
V "Above the rest this note shall swell,
V My Jesus hath done all things well."
¶ The fatal hour came at last when the brittle thread of
  life snapped asunder, and his spirit fled to an invisible
  world. This mournful event took place on the 27th
  day of January, 1823. It was a day never to be for-
  gotten. Although my poor husband had suffered under
  so protracted an illness, and I had had so much time
  to prepare for the solemn hour, I found my strength
  very inadequate to sustain the awful scene; my strength,
  alas, was perfect weakness; but God was my strong
  tower and my refuge in the day of distress. Some kind
  friends came forward, and offered to undertake the inter-
  ment of the corpse and defray the expences of his
  funeral; but as it was the last thing I could do for him,
  I declined their generous offer, and chose rather to do
  it myself; and though it involved me in considerable
  expense, my creditors waited patiently, until by the
  Lord's blessing I was enabled pay it all off to the utter-
  most farthing; to God be all the praise!
## 52
¶ After my dear husband was buried, and I had be-
  come a little settled, instead of submitting myself in
  all things to be led by the Spirit, I rather leaned to
  my own understanding, and procured a situation of
  servitude for my little girl, and another for myself,
  judging these the best means I could adopt for the
  liquidation of my debts; and I remained in service
  until my health was so impaired that I was compelled
  to relinquish it; nor did the blessing of my heavenly
  Father appear to prosper this course; for I was con-
  stantly obliged to be under medical treatment, and yet
  grew worse and worse. I therefore left my situation,
  and went back to my house, which I had still reserved
  in case I should want it. I then opened a school, and
  the Lord blessed the effort, and increased the number of
  my pupils, so that I soon had a nice little school;
  many of the society of friends came and visited it, and
  assisted me with books and other necessaries for it.
  They were also much pleased with the improvement of
  the children; and when any strangers came to visit
  Burlington, they introduced them to me; and it was
  gratifying to many of them to see a female of colour
  teaching the coloured children, whom the white people
  refused to admit into their {seminaries;?} and who had been
  suffered formerly to run about the streets for want of a
  teacher. The pride of a white skin is a bauble of great
  value with many in some parts of the United States, who
  readily sacrifice their intelligence to their prejudices,
  and possess more knowledge than wisdom. The
  Almighty accounts not the black races of man either
  in the order of nature or spiritual capacity as inferior to
  the white; for He bestows his Holy Spirit on, and dwells
## 53
  in them as readily as in persons of whiter complexion: the
  Ethiopian eunuch was adopted as a son and heir of God;
  and when Ethiopia shall stretch forth her hands unto him,
  their submission and worship will be graciously accepted.
  This prejudice was far less prevalent in that part of the
  country where I resided in my infancy; for when a
  child, I was not prohibited from any school on account
  of the colour of my skin. Oh! that men would outgrow
  their nursery prejudices and learn that "God hath
  made of one blood all the nations of men that dwell
  upon all the face of the earth." Acts xvii. 26.
¶ But my mind was not long at rest in this situation;
  for the remembrance of the commission which I had
  received from the Lord very strongly impressed me;
  and as the Lord had said, "Thou must preach the
  gospel, and thou must travel far and wide," so He was
  about to bring it to pass, but I knew not in what man-
  ner. I was not as yet out of debt; and with an empty
  exchequer, I felt myself but ill adapted to set out on an
  excursion for preaching the gospel. I was not as yet
  sufficiently broken in nor bent enough to the discipline
  of heaven, entirely to live and walk in the Spirit; but
  projected many schemes and ways for the Lord to act
  by; yet He did not stoop down to my wretched concep-
  tions, nor avail Himself of my short-sighted plans: for
  He hath said, "I am God, and besides me there is no
  Saviour." "For as the heavens are higher than the
  earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my
  thoughts than your thoughts." Isaiah lv. 9. I ap-
  pointed many opportunities in my own mind, on which
  to venture on a journey into the country to preach the
  gospel in far distant places, if the Lord would before-
## 54
  hand furnish me with the necessary supplies for such an
  undertaking; but I thought it a sin to undertake such
  a journey while I remained indebted to any man. And
  here Satan bound me down for two years; at the expi-
  ration of which, I possessed no more accumulation of
  funds than before; and notwithstanding that my school
  was greatly improved, yet I was hedged up on every
  side; as it is written, "Cursed is every one that con-
  tinueth not in all things written in the book of the law
  to do them."
¶ I then began to question the reality of my call to the
  ministry; and endeavoured to bring it to the test by
  laying my heart before the Lord, and solemnly praying
  to the God of my salvation, that if it were His will for
  me to go out to preach the gospel, He would give me a
  token thereof by opening my way before me at the end
  of three months; and, if otherwise, that He would re-
  move from my mind the weighty impression, which
  clogged me with care, kept me as a prisoner on parole,
  and blighted every other prospect in life. I accordingly
  waited very quietly until the time was nearly expired,
  watching carefully the signs of the time; but all was
  still dark; and not only so, I was also attacked with a
  severe fit of sickness, and rendered unable to attend to
  my school. I then concluded that I had been mistaken,
  and endeavoured to attribute my past impressions to
  the zeal of imagination; for I thought, if it had really
  been the design of God to send me forth to preach His
  gospel, He would have disposed my affairs so as to open
  my way, and suitably replenish my purse for the journey;
  but instead of this being the case, my situation became
  more and more irksome, and hemmed in with difficul-
## 55
  ties. Oh! how amazingly difficult is it for the Chris-
  tian, when decoyed by erratic gleams, or delusive prin-
  ciples, he misses his way, wanders from his proper
  compass point, and flounders amongst the marshy
  reeds of worldly principles and proprieties, to detect
  his error, espy the gospel beacon, and regain his path:
  thus it was with me; and in prayer I said to my hea-
  venly master, in reference to my ministry, "Now I know
  that I am mistaken; and I am not going out at all."
¶ I had no sooner uttered these words, than a dreadful
  and chilling gloom instantaneously fluttered over, and
  covered my mind; the Spirit of the Lord fled out of
  my sight, and left me in total darkness—such darkness
  as was truly felt; so awful a sensation I never felt be-
  fore or since. I had quenched the Spirit, and became
  like a tormented {demon:?} I knew not what to do, for
  I had lost my spiritual enjoyments; my tongue was also
  silenced, so that I was unable for speak to God: and
  though my congregation continued to meet every Lord's
  day, I had no power whatever to preach to them. The
  members of the class inquired why I did not preach to
  the people? "You see," said they, "how the people
  flock to hear you, and yet you do not preach to them."
  This went like a dagger to my heart; for it was evi-
  dent to all that I had displeased my God, and there-
  fore He had withdrawn His Holy Spirit from me; nor had
  I any life or power whatever in prayer. I then laid my
  case before some of the church; but none of them could
  administer any comfort to me. I also consulted some
  of the Society of Friends, but they could give me no
  instructions, because my business was not with mortal
  man, but with the living God. The anguish of my soul
## 56
  continually increased; every thing went contrary with
  me, and I fretted and repined, and found fault when
  there was no occasion, except in myself. I shall never
  forget the reproof I received from my little daughter on
  account of the irritability of my temper. She looked at
  me one day, and said, "Mother, what does ail thee?
  why, I never saw thee so before; I believe thou art
  going to be like some of the queer old women." I re-
  ceived this reproof as sent from God, who, I believe,
  had put it into the mind of the child to utter it; and,
  from that day, I solemnly pledged myself to the Lord,
  that if He would again bestow on me the aids of His
  Holy Spirit, I would go forth in His ministry just as
  I was, not waiting for any further provision or prepara-
  tion, but trusting alone in His holy word; and I prayed
  that He would enable me again to preach to my people
  in Burlington; and that on such and such day of the
  month, I would obey His holy commands, whatever
  might become of me. The Lord accepted of my pro-
  position; and on the next Lord's day, my tongue was
  set at liberty, and my heart was enlarged; and I was
  enabled to preach with more fluency and copiousness
  than ever before. I then informed my audience, that I
  must leave them, and go out into the vineyard of the
  Lord; and announced to them on what day I should
  preach my farewell address to them. It was a Bochim,
  a day of weeping indeed with them, but they said, "the
  will of the Lord be done."
¶ I had been under this dark cloud for more than three
  weeks; and the time appeared to me more than three
  months; but it now retired, and my captivity vanished.
  Heaven again opened to my eyes and ears, because I
## 57
  was at last led to discern the path of obedience, and
  hearken to the counsel of the Almighty, saying, "This
  is the way; walk ye in it." The chastisement of God
  is often more profitable than His indulgence would be;
  His correction is kindness, and His severity mercy.
¶ My peace again flowed as a river on a calm summer's
  day; and I began to draw my school to a close. About
  three weeks prior to the time appointed for the dis-
  mission of my scholars, some friends who resided in the
  direction my mind was disposed to take, and with
  whom I had been previously acquainted, came to Bur-
  lington; and they, together with some of my dear
  people thought it advisable for me to accompany them
  on their return; but I saw no possibility of doing this,
  because they were about to take their departure before
  I could arrange my affairs, and receive the accounts
  due to me at the end of the current quarter. I there-
  fore informed my kind friend that I should not be ready
  to go with him; but he insisted upon it, and enforced
  it with many arguments. I replied, "It is utterly im-
  possible for me to be ready to go with you;" at which
  he seemed somewhat offended; and his wife then said,
  "Why, Zilpha, if thou feelest that thou art bound to
  go, and if it is thy wish to go, and if thou canst not
  get ready at this time, never mind, go as soon as thou
  canst, and thou wilt get along somehow, and thou wilt
  hardly understand how; if thou art sent, He that sends
  thee will take care of thee." This filled my heart with
  tenderness, and my eyes with tears, and I replied, "Oh,
  neighbour Hull, this is a word of consolation indeed
  now I will return home and weep before the Lord, and
  all will be well." I returned home, and my little daugh-
## 58
  ter seeing the tears flowing down my cheeks, said to
  me, "Now, mother, what is the matter?" for she was
  aware of the great anxiety of mind I had so long been
  labouring under, and said all she could to comfort me;
  and added, "If I were you, I should not mind what
  any person said, but I should go just as I had arranged
  to go, and do not think any thing about me, for I shall
  do very well." By this time my scholars had gathered,
  and the school business commenced; and for the Bible
  class, the lesson was in the Psalms; one of the little
  boys commenced the 125th Psalm, which begins thus,
  "They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion,
  which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever." While
  the psalm was being read, it seemed as if I had never
  seen it before; but the Almighty had sent it as a special
  message from heaven to me: those words so filled my
  heart, that all my tears were dried away, and I could
  only exclaim, "Glory be to God!" My soul rejoiced
  in God my Saviour, yea, the God of my salvation. No
  more foreboding fears assailed me; every circumstance
  readily converged to its proper point, and all things
  were prepared exactly to the appointed hour. I took
  my little girl, and placed her under the care of a dear
  relative of mine, and proceeded on my way to the City
  of Philadelphia, commenced my Master's business, and
  strange to relate, when I arrived in that large city,
  every one appeared to be acquainted with my situation.
  I preached in a great many chapels, and every congre-
  gation voluntarily made a collection for my aid; and
  every person at whose house I visited, gave me some-
  thing for my journey. Oh! how astonishing was this
  to me. I had been for several years striving to provide
## 59
  myself with necessary supplies for my Master's work,
  and without success; nor did I ever think of obtaining
  any money in my travels. It never occurred to me
  that I should receive a single penny in this work: but
  when I was willing, I ought to say—made willing to go
  just as I was, as the apostles of old, without purse or
  scrip, then the Lord made my way straight before me,
  and dealt bountifully with me; then was that blessed
  promise verified, "Seek ye the kingdom of God, and
  His righteousness, and all other things shall be added
  unto you." In the first three weeks I obtained every
  particle that I wanted, and abundance of silver to pro-
  ceed on my journey with. Oh! what mercy and what
  goodness was manifested to such a poor, unbelieving,
  weak, and unworthy instrument as me. How often
  have I said, "Lord! send by whom thou wilt send,
  only send not by me; for thou knowest that I am
  ignorant: how can I be a mouth for God!—a poor,
  coloured female: and thou knowest we have many things
  to endure which others do not." But the answer was,
  "What is that to thee? follow thou me."
¶ Thus I left my child and ventured on my journey, not
  knowing whither I should go. From Philadelphia I
  started for New York; and on my journey passed
  within three hundred yards of my own home, yet did
  not call there, but pursued my journey and arrived in
  New York; and there the Lord rendered my ministry a
  blessing to many precious souls—glory be to His name.
  I was absent from home seven months; and when I re-
  turned, I was able to meet my creditors and pay my
  debts, which was an unspeakable indulgence. Halle-
  lujah. Praise the Lord.
## 60
¶ I returned home in April, 1828, and remained there
  a few days. During my stay at home, I was one day
  exercised with devout contemplations of God, and sud-
  denly the Spirit came upon me, and a voice addressed
  me, saying, "Be of good cheer, and be faithful: I will
  yet bring thee to England and thou shalt see London,
  that great city, and declare my name there." I looked
  round to ascertain from whence and from whom the
  voice proceeded, but no person was near me; my sur-
  prise was so great that my very blood seemed to stag-
  nate and chill in my veins: it was evidently the Spirit
  of the Lord whose I am, and whom I serve, who had
  spoken to me; and my soul responded to His word,
  saying, "The will of the Lord be done in and by me on
  earth, as it is by His servants in Heaven." My mind was
  at this time very much perplexed as to what was the
  will of God concerning me: I was in doubt as to what
  I ought to do; but, after a few days, I took my journey
  again to Philadelphia, with the intention of visiting the
  southern or slave-holding states of America; here I saw
  my dear daughter, and remained with my friends during
  some few weeks; but the confusion of my mind still
  continued, and whenever I opened a bible, wherever I
  visited, as well as at my apartments, the book of the
  prophet Jonah was perpetually presented before me. I
  mentioned to my friends the uncertainty of my mind as
  to what the Lord required me to do, the propriety of a
  voyage to England, and my repeatedly opening in the
  Bible at the book of Jonah; and they assured me that if
  it was God's will that I should then visit England, He
  would make it appear, and smooth the way for me in His
  own good time. I therefore rested upon this assurance;
## 61
  and while I yet abode in Philadelphia, I dreamed one
  night, that I saw two ships cleared out of the docks there,
  bound for England, and I was not on board either of them.
  I then concluded that the time for my journey to England
  had not yet come; and being now satisfied on this
  matter, I started off for the southern territories of the
  United States, where slavery is established and enforced
  by law. When I arrived in the slave states, Satan
  much worried and distressed my soul with the fear of
  being arrested and sold for a slave, which their laws
  would have warranted, on account of my complexion
  and features. On one occasion, in particular, I had been
  preaching to a coloured congregation, and had exhorted
  them impressively to quit themselves as men approved
  of God, and to maintain and witness a good profession
  of their faith before the world, &c. I had no sooner
  sat down, than Satan suggested to me with such force,
  that the slave-holders would speedily capture me, as
  filled me with fear and terror. I was then in a small
  town in one of the slave states; and the news of a
  coloured female preaching to the slaves had already
  been spread widely throughout the neighbourhood; the
  novelty of the thing had produced an immense excitement,
  and the people were collecting from every quarter, to gaze
  at the unexampled prodigy of a coloured female preacher.
  I was sitting in a very conspicuous situation near the
  door, and I observed, with very painful emotions, the
  crowd outside, pointing with their fingers at me, and
  saying, "that's her," "that's her;" for Satan strongly
  set before me the prospect of an immediate arrest and
  consignment by sale to some slave owner. Being very
  much alarmed, I removed from my seat to a retired part
## 62
  of the room, where, becoming more collected, I inquired
  within myself, "from whence cometh all this fear?"
  My faith then rallied and my confidence in the Lord
  returned, and I said, "get thee behind me Satan, for
  my Jesus hath made me free." My fears instantly for-
  sook me, and I vacated my retired corner, and came
  forth before all the people again; and the presence and
  power of the Lord became greatly manifested in the
  assembly during the remainder of the service. At the
  earnest request of the friends, I consented to preach
  there again on the following Lord's-day morning, which
  I accordingly did. Some of the white brethren in con-
  nexion with the Methodist Society were present on that
  occasion; at the conclusion thereof, they introduced
  themselves to me, and wished me to preach for them in
  the afternoon; to which I agreed; and they obtained
  permission of the authorities to open and use the court-
  house; and therein I obtained a very large auditory:
  and God gave forth proofs that my ministry was from
  Him, in giving me many seals to it on that day; thus was
  I relieved from my fearful forebodings, and pursued my
  course with increased energy, rejoicing in the prosperity
  and success with which the Almighty crowned my efforts.
¶ After this, I visited Baltimore in the State of Mary-
  land, and attended a conference of the coloured bre-
  thren, by whom I was very kindly received; a large
  field of labour was provided, and a great and effectual
  door of utterance opened to me by the Lord. After
  labouring there for some weeks, I proceeded to the
  City of Washington, the capital of the United States,
  and the seat of government: here also I laboured with
  much success; many souls obtaining the knowledge of
## 63
  salvation by the remission of their sins, with the gift of
  the Holy Spirit, through the instrumentality of so feeble
  an earthen vessel. I continued my travels southward
  into the State of Virginia, and arrived at the City of
  Alexandria, where the Lord rendered my labours effec-
  tual to the conversion of many from darkness to light,
  and from the power of Satan unto God. I abode there
  two months, and was an humble agent, in the Lord's
  hand, of arousing many of His heritage to a great
  revival; and the weakness and incompetency of the
  poor coloured female but the more displayed the excel-
  lency of the power to be of God. There were some
  among the great folks whom curiosity induced to
  attend my ministry; and this formed a topic of lively
  interest with many of the slave holders, who thought it
  surpassingly strange that a person (and a female) be-
  longing to the same family stock with their poor debased,
  uneducated, coloured slaves, should come into their
  territories and teach the enlightened proprietors the
  knowledge of God; and more strange still was it to
  some others, when in the spirit and power of Christ,
  that female drew the portraits of their characters, made
  manifest the secrets of their hearts, and told them all
  things that ever they did. This was a paradox to them
  indeed: for they were not deficient of pastors and
  reverend divines, who possessed all the advantages of
  talents, learning, respectability and worldly influence,
  to aid their religious efforts; and yet the power of
  truth and of God was never so manifest in any of their
  agencies, as with the dark coloured female stranger,
  who had come from afar to minister amongst them.
  But God hath chosen the weak things of the world to
## 64
  confound the mighty. Divine goodness raised me and
  honoured me as an angel of God; yet my bodily presence
  continued weak; the passions, frailties and imperfections
  of humanity abounded in my own consciousness; the
  union of such meanness and honour rendered me a riddle
  to myself. I became such a prodigy to this people, that
  I was watched wherever I went; and if I went out to
  tea with any of the friends, the people would flock
  around the house where I was; and as soon as they
  judged that the repast was finished, they came in and
  filled the house, and required me to minister to them
  the word of life, whether I had previously intended to
  preach or not. The people became increasingly earnest
  in their inquiries after truth; and great was the number
  of those who were translated out of the empire of
  darkness into the Kingdom of God's dear Son.
¶ At this place, resided a gentleman named Abijah
  Janney, belonging to the society of friends, at whose
  house I spent many delightful hours. One day he
  requested to speak with me alone; and having accom-
  panied him to another apartment, when we were
  seated, he said to me, "Now Zilpha, I perceive that
  thy visit to this place will be attended with much good,
  if thy deportment amongst the whites{,?} and especially
  amongst the slaves, be prudently conducted; for there
  seemeth in reference to the great topics of thy ministry
  to be much interest felt by the people generally."
  This was a well-timed and salutary caution, and most
  prudent advice to me, situated as I was in connexion
  with two distinct communities, so opposite in condition,
  so contrasted in intelligence, and so antipodal in their
  feelings and prejudices. These words at such a time
  were to me as apples of gold in pictures of silver.
## 65
¶ During my continuance in this city, I had a very
  severe attack of the fever which is endemial in that
  climate; but I was attended by a physician of first
  rate eminence, and by several most kind and anxious
  nurses; and the Lord was pleased speedily to raise me
  up again; most kind and affectionate were this people
  to me: before I was able to sit up an hour, Mr. Janney
  sent his carriage morning and evening to take me out,
  that I might be benefited by the refreshing breezes,
  and be regaled by the sweet zephyrs which gently fan
  over the verdant plains of that genial clime. It was
  the Lord's doing; and to him be all the praise.
¶ On my recovery, I again resumed my Divine Master's
  work; and going to my physician to discharge his
  demands for his skilful care and kind attendance upon
  me during my illness, he refused to receive any remu-
  neration, assuring me, the reflection that he had been
  instrumental, through the blessing of God, of contribu-
  ting towards my recovery, afforded him much pleasure;
  that it was his desire his past services to me should be
  free of cost; and expressed his hope that I might long
  be spared to do the will and work of the Lord
¶ Although I had been sick and laid aside for a time,
  I lost nothing, except the dross of earthly affections:
  it was merely a furnace, in which my heavenly father
  saw the necessity of my being placed for a time: and
  I believe that I was thereby weaned still more from
  the world, separated to my God and purified in holiness.
  The methodist preacher at that station, Mr. J. {Gess?},
  behaved to me with very great kindness; he much pro-
  moted my labours in that neighbourhood, and I pro-
  ceeded throughout the vicinity of Alexandria, preach-
## 66
  ing the gospel with the happiest results. On one
  occasion, I took an excursion with some ladies, a few
  miles into the country, to preach at a distant farm-
  house occupied by a Mr. Marifield; and as is usual
  with the farmers there to keep very savage dogs for
  the protection of their premises, this gentleman had
  three of those animals; very fierce and ferocious
  creatures, which met us at the door; but, as the family
  were present, without giving us any molestation; yet
  as the people soon came flocking to the meeting, the
  inmates were concerned on account of the ferocity of
  the dogs, and tried to fasten them up, but could not
  succeed; but God restrained the savage beasts and
  they were very quiet, though the assemblage was so
  large, that we were compelled to resort to the orchard,
  and hold our meeting beneath the spreading apple trees.
  When I took my position, the three dogs came and
  laid down, one on each side, and the other behind me;
  and there they remained till the conclusion of the
  service; and as the people shook hands with me and
  bade me adieu, they rose, wagged their heads, and
  brushed me as if to welcome my visit there. It was a
  most interesting and profitable season; and the presence
  and power of God were greatly manifested: there were
  several youth in attendance, who were reputed to be
  very wild and giddy, but they appeared to be struck with
  awe at the religious fervour manifested, and conducted
  themselves with reverence and solemnity.
¶ I had also another engagement, arranged by some
  friends, for me to go into another part of the country,
  about twelve miles distant, and preach in the grove; but
  I was prevented by heavy rains from fulfilling it for three
## 67
  Lord's days successively: at length, the weather becoming
  more favourable, I was published to preach there on the
  following Lord's day: as the time drew near, I was in
  much perplexity through inability to fix on any passage of
  Scripture as a text to preach from, or rather, because
  the Lord had not as yet presented a passage to my mind
  or fastened one upon my spirit; but as I was speaking to
  the dear friend at whose house I was then visiting, of
  the dilemma I was in, the following passage powerfully
  flashed upon my mind, "Set thine house in order, for
  thou shalt die and not live." In meditating upon this
  passage, my soul was barren. I was oppressed by a
  complete dearth of suitable ideas, and unable to obtain
  any spiritual opening or discernment of this text; I then
  foolishly endeavoured to abandon it; and as if I pos-
  sessed the right of self direction, or liberty to select what
  messages I pleased, searched the Scriptures for ano-
  ther text; but to no purpose; for every other was sealed
  up from me, though I continued my search until twelve
  o'clock on the Saturday night, and resumed it in the morn-
  ing at the dawning of light; but I learned that when the
  Lord impresses a text on the minds of His servants, that
  He will not be tempted by our solicitations to have ano-
  ther one substituted. Having such a distance to go,
  we started off at nine o'clock in the morning; and I
  went as reluctantly as a criminal goes to the bar: as we
  approached within a few miles of the selected spot, we
  observed the people from every direction over the face
  of the country repairing thither; which rendered the
  distress of my mind the more poignant. It is a weighty
  matter for a well-furnished preacher to address a nume-
  rous auditory in the name of the Lord of Hosts; but to
## 68
  go as I then did, destitute of a topic whereon to preach,
  was a mental affliction indeed. When we arrived at
  the place, it was already like a camp-meeting; the
  platform was erected, hundreds of persons assembled,
  and all things in readiness. I directly ascended the
  stand, and read forth a hymn, which was sang by
  the congregation, offered up prayer, and gave out
  another hymn. Whilst the congregation were singing,
  I was anxiously searching for a text to preach from;
  but no other could I find than that which had been
  given me. When, therefore, the singing was finished,
  I arose and read the passage before referred to, which
  I had no sooner done, than my mind took a compre-
  hensive grasp of the subject; a region of truths were
  unfolded to my view, such as I had never previously
  conceived of; and it occupied me an hour and a half
  to exhaust the fund of sentimental treasure, which the
  Divine Spirit poured into my mind. It was, indeed,
  a time of refreshing from the presence of the Lord.
¶ At the conclusion of my discourse, I inquired if there
  were any ministers present; intimating, that if this was
  the case, an opportunity was offered them of further
  addressing the audience; and a minister being present
  from George Town, who had arranged to preach a funeral
  sermon at a neighbouring spot, and the relatives of the
  deceased being all present, it was agreed that he should
  preach it there from the platform; and it constituted
  an appropriate sequel to my sermon; we enjoyed quite
  an heavenly day in the grove, and returned home in the
  evening in peace.
¶ Among the number of persons who were introduced
  into the fold of our God, in the city of Alexandria, was
## 69
  Miss Butts, a young lady who found peace with God
  through our Lord Jesus Christ, and manifested remark-
  able piety. In the correspondence with which she sub-
  sequently favoured me, she indicated an affectionate
  desire to see me again in the flesh; and assured me of
  the happiness and freedom she enjoyed in the service of
  the Lord. The work of the Holy Spirit was greatly
  manifested in this city; both high and low, rich and
  poor, white and coloured, all drank out of the living
  streams which flowed from the City of our God. Every
  day brought me tidings of souls newly born of God. Even
  the angels in heaven rejoice over the repenting sinner,
  and much more should the redeemed on earth! Oh,
  the depth both of the riches and knowledge of God!
  How unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past
  finding out!
¶ Before I took my leave of this city, Lady Hunter, the
  wife of Major Hunter, came to Alexandria; being a
  member of the Methodist Society, she invited me to
  spend a few days at her house, and preach on the Lord's
  day. I accepted the invitation, and enjoyed my visit
  greatly. The Major was not a religious man; and as
  the ministers frequently visited his Lady, he was in
  the habit of attacking them with controversial cavils
  against their faith. As he displayed but little respect to
  persons, when he came home from the city, accom-
  panied by several other gentlemen, the Bible was pro-
  duced, the family summoned to evening prayers, and I
  was required to officiate as chaplain. As I prayed,
  read, and commented upon the Scriptures, he mustered
  his interrogatories, and produced his objections. I
  had no more desire for a mental collision than
## 70
  ambition for or prospect of a triumph in a contest for
  intellectual pre-eminence with such an antagonist; but
  as He who sent me, helped my infirmities, and was
  ever ready to succour me, I was enabled to reply to all
  his questions and quibbles, and maintain the truth.
  Indeed, he appeared highly gratified that my answers
  were such as in no way put the cause of religion to the
  blush before his friends, who had been introduced for
  the purpose of testing my poor feminine abilities. The
  Lord directed his servants on such emergencies, to take
  no thought or premeditation for the framing of their
  speech; and promised them a suitable inspiration of
  his Holy Spirit; and he richly assisted me on this
  occasion; to Him, therefore, be all the renown!
¶ Taking my departure, amidst the regrets of many,
  from Alexandria, I returned to Washington: my visits
  were very numerous there among the people; and my
  company was desired by many of the great folks, even
  by the friends and associates of the President of the
  United States. Some religious gentlemen, friendly to
  the cause of missions, proposed for me to go out to
  Africa, and labour among the native tribes; but I de-
  clined their proposal; telling them, my heavenly
  Father had given me no such direction; and I dared
  not go thither unless sent by his Divine Majesty; but
  if God had required me to go thither, I should not have
  ventured on a refusal: they therefore urged this matter
  no further. I was continually visited by ladies from all
  parts of the city and its vicinity; many of them in-
  formed me they had heard their friends relate, with
  most lively interest, the astonishing wonders of divine
  grace and power, which had attended our meetings in
## 71
  the groves; and what seasons of refreshing and spi-
  ritual edification they had experienced at those meet-
  ings. When on a visit at the residence of General
  Van Ease, I was invited by Lady Lee, the wife of
  General Lee, to a visit at her residence; and to preach
  at a chapel the ladies had erected at Green-leaf point,
  for the use of the missionaries who came thither. On
  the day appointed, her carriage came for me, and I
  went accordingly: after tea, a great number of her
  friends met there, who were going to the meeting; and
  among them was Commodore Rogers and his Lady,
  with many others who came from a distance. When
  the time came, Mrs. Lee and myself went on first; and
  she took the opportunity to caution me against the sup-
  position that the bulk of those ladies and gentlemen were
  religious persons; assuring me they were merely coming
  from motives of curiosity to hear what I might say, and
  witness my performance. If I had gone confiding in my
  own poor abilities, this information would, doubtless, have
  utterly disconcerted me; but I depended on the faithful
  promise of my Master, that he will be with me even unto
  the end; nor was I disappointed. A large congrega-
  tion assembled, composed of persons of all grades of
  society. I commenced the service by reading a portion
  of the Scriptures; when I gave forth my hymn, the ladies
  assisted to sing it, and the service was thus far sus-
  tained with propriety. I based my discourse on the
  Gospel of St. John v. 25. The Lord was pleased to
  give efficacy to the word of His grace, and to apply it
  with saving power to the mind of Lady Rogers. I
  perceived in the course of my sermon, that she was
  greatly interested and powerfully affected by it: indeed
## 72
  a mighty religious awe and solemnity rested upon the
  entire assembly. During the service, and for several
  days afterwards, the spiritual welfare of Mrs. Rogers
  was a theme, which, as it were, involuntarily occupied a
  very prominent interest in my mind; and I felt strongly
  assured that the Lord would endow her with the rich
  blessings of his salvation. In a few days after, I pro-
  ceeded on my travels, and heard nothing further of the
  results of this meeting.
¶ My next visit was to Baltimore, and from thence I
  went to Annapolis, where I continued during a great
  part of the winter. Here, also, the Lord gave forth to
  the people His gracious attestations that my ministry
  was from Him; for my speech and my preaching were
  not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in de-
  monstration of the Spirit, and in power: it was mighty
  through God, to the pulling down of strongholds; and
  became the power of God to the salvation of many.
  On one Lord's-day evening in this place, I was led by
  the Spirit to discourse very impressively on mortality
  and death; so much so, that my sermon might have
  been well suited to a funereal occasion; I was succeeded
  in the pulpit by a local preacher, a coloured brother
  and a slave; this poor brother seemed to manifest an
  undue anxiety for his freedom. Certainly, freedom is
  preferable to bondage, as saith the apostle Paul, 1 Cor.
  vii 21; who bade the Christian brethren in bondage to
  be unconcerned about it, unless an opportunity arrived
  of their attaining freedom; in which case, they wer
  to avail themselves thereof. This poor brother in bonds,
  however, was very impatient of slavery, and anxiously
  sighed for liberty. Alas! his life and spirit, his body,
## 73
  his bones, and his blood, as respects this life, were
  legally the property of, and at the disposal of his fellow
  man. But his sighs were heard in heaven by Him who
  looseth the prisoners, and the time of his release arrived.
  In that same week he was taken ill, and finally fell asleep
  in Jesus, departing to be "where the wicked cease
  from troubling, and the weary are at rest. There the
  prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the
  oppressor; the small and great are there, and the
  servant is free from his master." Job iii. 17—19. His
  interment was a remarkably afflictive occasion: his
  corpse was brought into the chapel during the time of
  service, and the wailings of the congregation grew so
  intense, that the officiating minister was unable to pro-
  ceed with the service. The suddenness of the stroke
  was surprising; and the loss of their beloved minister
  appeared to his sorrowful flock more like a dream than
  a fact. Oh, the abominations of slavery! though Phile-
  mon be the proprietor, and Onesimus the slave, yet every
  case of slavery, however lenient its inflictions, and miti-
  gated its atrocities, indicates an oppressor, the oppressed,
  and the oppression. Slavery in every case, save those of
  parental government, criminal punishment, or the self-
  protecting detentions of justifiable war, if such can hap-
  pen, involves a wrong, the deepest in wickedness of any
  included within the range of the second table.
¶ In the Slave States of America the law sanctions the
  arrest of any person of colour, within their territories;
  and unless such person can produce the most un-
  exceptionable papers in proof of his freedom, the legal
  officers may sell him on behalf of the State, into per-
  petual captivity. Blessed for ever be the Lord, who
## 74
  sent me out to preach his gospel even in these regions
  of wickedness, He preserved me in my going out and
  my coming in; so that the production of the docu-
  ments of my freedom was not once demanded during
  my sojourn on the soil of slavery. While staying at
  Annapolis, I was engaged to preach at a place some
  miles distant in the country, and while proceeding
  thither in a one horse chaise, we were obliged to cross
  a river, and were about to get into the ferry-boat, to-
  gether with our horse and chaise, when the horse fell
  down and put us in danger of drowning; but by the
  dexterity of the men who assisted us, and the blessing
  of God, we safely landed on the other side, still further
  in the interior of the Slave States. On another oc-
  casion, I went from Annapolis to preach on the Lord's
  day at another station in the country. Many hundreds
  were collected together, to whom I preached from
  these words, "Behold the Bridegroom cometh; go ye
  out to meet him." An elderly gentleman sat in a very
  conspicuous seat just before me, greatly agitated; the
  restraint of his emotions was evidently a matter of great
  difficulty, for his soul had deeply adopted the prayer
  of the publican, "God be merciful to me a sinner."
  When I retired from the pulpit the people rushed eagerly
  forward to salute me; they appeared to be quite over-
  powered by their penitential feelings, and in an agony
  of self-abasement. The multitude of repenting sinners
  on that occasion doubtless exhilirated many an angel-
  mind, and caused heaven itself to thrill with joy. That
  my mission was from God was manifest to them by His
  communication of the Holy Spirit, through my ministry,
  to those who received my testimony; the power of the
## 75
  Lord was present, indeed, to pull down some of the
  strongholds of Satan, and to set up Christ in the hearts
  of the people. On my return to Annapolis, I was
  thrown out of my chaise, and so much injured that I
  was unable to preach in the evening, in the city. I
  was very ill in consequence for some time, but the Lord
  raised me up again and restored me to health. On my
  recovery I resumed my work; and being on a visit at
  the house of one of our ministers, I heard tidings of
  Lady Rogers of Washington, through the medium of a
  minister who had recently been there. Being on a visit
  to Commodore Rogers, the latter inquired if he knew
  anything of the preaching woman, adding, that he
  hoped God would bless every lane of her life; for that
  his wife was become a very pious woman through at-
  tending a meeting held by her, at Green Leaf's point;
  and further, if she would come and reside in that neigh-
  bourhood, he would make a suitable provision for her
  subsistence. A gentleman residing in the city of An-
  napolis, offered to give me a house and a plot of ground
  on condition of my residing there; but it was not meet
  for me to depart from my Master's work, from con-
  siderations of worldly interest. I dared not, like Demas,
  forsake my itinerating ministry, to love this present
  world: nor was filthy lucre the object I had in view
  in the service of the gospel. The cheerful liberality of
  grateful affection is one of the evidences of sincere
  discipleship to Jesus; but the love of mammon has no
  place in the hearts of his true ministers, who love the
  flock rather than the fleece.
¶ Before I left Annapolis a gentleman, named Watson,
  residing in the city, one of the local preachers, ear-
## 76
  nestly desired me to accompany him to Mount Tabor,
  about ten miles distant, and preach for him in his ap-
  pointment; I had no desire for this journey on account
  of my remaining weakness, and the severity of the
  season, it being winter: but as he would take no de-
  nial, coming repeatedly to solicit my compliance, I re-
  luctantly consented, and a dreary journey we had; the
  cold being intensely rigorous, the roads bad, and travel-
  ling dangerous. On our arrival I found that the people
  had not been apprised of my coming, but Mr. Watson
  ascended the pulpit and introduced me to the audience;
  he then retired and I occupied his place, very much to
  the astonishment of the people. A young man was
  present who behaved very indecorously, and as the
  people came in he pointed with his finger to me, titter-
  ing and laughing. Poor young man; before that meet-
  ing was terminated, his laughter was turned to weeping.
  This place was on that day a Mount Tabor indeed,
  not celebrated by the visit of Moses, but blest with the
  presence of Christ. After the service the brethren re-
  quested me to preach for them again on the 25th day
  of December, commonly called Christmas day; but
  Mr. Watson thought it best to decline another journey
  in so inclement a season; it was therefore arranged that
  I should abide at the house of Mr. Beard, one of the
  trustees of the chapel, till after the 25th instant; and
  I accordingly returned with him and his family to their
  house to dinner. At this place I was still further in the
  interior of the Slave States, and now left without an
  earthly protector. During the dinner time, the young
  man above referred to formed the topic of conversation.
  It appears that he was a slave-driver, accounted the most
## 77
  profligate drunkard in that vicinity, and habituated to
  every vice; and it was remarked that he had never
  been previously known to evince so much serious at-
  tention to a sermon as he had paid to my discourse, in
  the morning: and that his kneeling during the con-
  cluding prayer was a matter of surprise to them; how-
  ever, my mind was greatly moved with evangelic in-
  terest for this young man: and, like Paul, for the
  Galatians, I travailed in birth for him.
¶ On the appointed morning of the 25th instant, I said
  to one of Mr. Beard's sons, who was a member of the
  society, "Now, brother, let us go to meeting, having our
  swords sharpened, and who knows but God will give us
  this young man?" "Oh!" he replied, "he is far enough off
  from here by this time, and has swallowed many bowls of
  drink ere now." On hearing this, I gave up all expectation
  of seeing him; but when we entered the chapel, to my
  great surprise he was there, clothed, and in his right
  mind. I preached that morning from Luke ii. 10; and,
  under the sermon, every heart was melted, nor was one
  person to be found in the entire assembly, whose eyes
  were not suffused with tears. The gallery of the chapel
  was occupied by the slaves, and the body of the build-
  ing with proprietors; and all were alike affected. Mr.
  Beard requested the congregation to restrain the expres-
  sion of their feelings; but the powerful operation of the
  Holy Spirit disdained the limits prescribed by man's
  reason, and bore down all the guards of human pro-
  priety and order. The presence of the Holy Ghost
  filled the place, and moved the people as the wind
  moves the forest boughs. Mr. Beard's cautions were
  unavailing; the coloured people in the gallery wept
## 78
  aloud, and raised vehement cries to heaven; the people
  below were also unable to restrain their emotions; and
  all wept beneath the inspirations of the Spirit of grace.
  I was obliged to stop in my discourse, and give vent to
  my own feelings, and leave it to God to preach in His own
  more effectual way. Oh, what a memorable day was
  this! Saints and angels poured their little current of
  holy and benevolent sympathies into the volume of
  mercy, love, and grace, which streamed from the com-
  passions of the Infinite Eternal into our little earthly
  sanctuary, to staunch the bleeding heart, remove its
  guilt, reform its character, and give new impulse to its
  powers. At the conclusion of the service, several of
  the gentlemen present collected a sum of money amongst
  themselves, which they presented to me, with great
  expressions of gratitude for the faithful and warning
  discourse I had preached to them in reference to their
  spiritual interests; the brethren, also, cordially invited
  me to come again, offering me the use of the chapel
  whenever I thought fit to come and occupy it: they
  wished me God's speed, and we took our farewell of
  each other, probably to meet no more until the gospel
  dispensation and its ministry is closed for ever.
¶ I then returned to Annapolis, and received the kind
  welcome of my dear friends there; and from thence I
  proceeded on my journey homeward, through Baltimore
  and Philadelphia, to Burlington; and thus closed with
  me the year 1829, amid scenes of usefulness and godly
  revivals and conversions to Christ, the memory of
  which will be cherished with the most lively interest by
  thousands of persons.
¶ I will mention, in this place, that many months after
## 79
  my visit to Mount Tabor, I received a letter from the
  young man whose conversion is above narrated; in which
  he earnestly desired me to come and visit them again,
  offering to defray all the expenses of the journey; but
  the Lord had directed my steps in another direction,
  and kept my conscience tender and fearful of offend-
  ind him; so that I durst not step aside from the path
  of His guidance for any private interest, personal grati-
  fication, or earthly gain. Whatever of sorrow or diffi-
  culty I met with in the paths of the Lord, I was ena-
  bled to sustain, and cheerfully to bear the cross after
  my loving Lord and Master; but the privilege of self-
  direction the Lord did not permit so ignorant and in-
  competent a servant as I was, to exercise. It was one
  of the crying provocations of ancient Israel, that "they
  did every man that which seemed right in the sight of his
  own eyes," and "walked after the imagination of their
  own hearts." May I ever be preserved to "trust in the Lord
  with all my heart, and not lean to my own understanding."
  Lord! ever teach me the way wherein I should go.
V "Oh, may thy Spirit guide my feet,
V In ways of righteousness;
V Make every path of duty plain
V And straight before my face:
V Since I'm a stranger here below,
V Let not my path be hid;
V But mark the road my feet should go,
V And be my constant guide."
¶ When I was a child, I thought as a child; and often
  wondered how the ancient servants of the Lord knew the
  will of God in reference to their movements in life; and
  how they understood when and whither the Lord re-
  quired them to go; but when I had fully dedicated
  myself to the service of the Lord, I experienced "the
  secret of the Lord to be with them that fear him."
## 80
  When our souls are in a right position before God, the
  will of the Lord, in reference to our future movements,
  is always made manifest and plain to us in the Lord's
  own time. It is only when we are carnal, wayward,
  neglectful, and disobedient, that our mental vision be-
  comes obscure, and we fail of reading the Lord's indi-
  cations, or that he ceases to bless us with His guidance.
  In all the errands on which the Lord has been graci-
  ously pleased to send me for the proclamation of His
  gospel, my work has been attended with the witness of
  His Spirit, and He hath given seals to my ministry, and
  souls for my hire.
¶ My mind was at this time directed to the northern
  States of America; and I accordingly took my daughter
  with me, and went to New York, where I abode some
  few weeks, and then went, accompanied by many of
  the brethren, to Oyster Bay, to attend a camp-meeting
  held there, which proved a very blessed season to many
  hundreds of persons; and numbers were, on that occa-
  sion, savingly converted to God. On the second time
  of my appearing in public at that place, I preached
  from Deut. v. 29, "Oh, that there were such an heart
  in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my com-
  mandments always, that it might be well with them,
  and with their children for ever;" and under this dis-
  course, it pleased God to capture my own daughter in
  the gospel net; she cried out aloud, during the service,
  and exclaimed, "Oh, Lord! have mercy upon me, for
  I can hold out no longer. Oh, Lord! have mercy upon
  me." This occurred in the midst of listening hun-
  dreds, and it produced a most thrilling sensation upon
  the congregation; for, said they, "It is her own daugh-
## 81
  ter!" and their emotions of sympathy were still more
  excited, when they learnt that she was my only child.
  Many a mother strongly felt with me on that occasion;
  and though my position would not allow me to leave
  the pulpit, to go and pour the oil of consolation into
  her wounded spirit, yet, thank God, there were abun-
  dance of dear friends present who were ready for every
  good word and work. The conversion of a soul is not
  to be effected by the mere effort of man; none but God
  can communicate a full pardon to the guilty soul; but,
  ere that meeting dissolved, the glorious work was ac-
  complished, and Christ, the chiefest of ten thousand and
  the altogether lovely, was manifested in her heart, the
  hope of glory: thus she experienced the knowledge of
  salvation by the remission of her sins, being called out
  of darkness into God's marvellous light; the Spirit of
  adoption was imparted to her; she rejoiced in the Lord
  with all her soul; and His love was shed abroad in her
  heart by the Holy Ghost.
¶ We then returned to New York, where I apprenticed
  her to the dress-making business: and taking my leave
  of her and the friends there, I departed for Newhaven, in
  the State of Connecticut, being richly replenished by
  Him who hath said, "I will never leave thee nor for-
  sake thee;" and as I went to and fro in the earth, from
  place to place, embracing a scope of space and effort
  too vast for minute detail, the Lord blessed my labours
  wherever I went, to the conversion of sinners and the
  edification of saints; but I was not wholly exempted
  from those trials and persecutions, which are the com-
  mon lot of the servants of Jesus. The principalities
  and powers of evil spirits, (Ephes. vi. 12) which Chris-
## 82
  tians have to contend against, which Christ despoiled,
  (Colos. ii. 15) and which constitute the strength of the
  empire of darkness, the world of evil spirits, the right
  hand of the prince of the power of the air, (Ephes. ii. 2)
  who is the god or deity of this world, (2 Cor. iv. 4); these
  principalities occasionally obstructed me much; and, by
  blinding and infatuating the sons of men, inspired them
  with a hostile zeal against me. This was particularly the
  case at Hartford; in which city some of the most influ-
  ential ministers of the Presbyterian body greatly opposed
  me; and one of them, a Mr. House, resolutely declared
  that he would have my preaching stopped; but he, like
  Sanballat, imagined a vain thing; for the work was of
  God, who made bare his arm for the salvation of men by
  my ministry. Thanks be unto God who always caused
  me to truimph in Christ; and made manifest the savour
  of his knowledge by me in every place.
¶ While the opponents of my ministry were pursuing
  their plans of opposition, it happened that I was sent
  for one day to visit a Mr. Freeman, who was danger-
  ously ill; I accordingly went to see him: and while
  occupied in praying with him, his medical attendant,
  a physician of the first eminence, and moving in the
  highest rank in society, came into the chamber; he
  waited patiently until my supplications were concluded,
  and I had withdrawn; he then inquired into the con-
  dition of his patient, and finding him much better, he
  exclaimed with surprise, "It is the woman who has
  made you better." No, dear reader, it was not by my
  power or holiness that the sick man was benefitted, but
  the power of God through faith in the name of Jesus;
  for the Scriptures say, that "the prayer of faith shall
## 83
  save the sick." On my departure from the house, the
  doctor inquired who I was, and from whence I came;
  and expressed his wish to hear me himself, desiring them
  to inform him when and where I should next preach.
  It appeared that he had previously heard many reports
  respecting me, for my ministry had been attended by
  persons of every rank in life.
¶ The time soon arrived for my appearance again in
  the pulpit, and many of the great folks were present,
  and amongst them, the physician; and the Spirit of the
  Lord was there also, to direct and bless and own his
  word, or the efforts of a poor weak female would have
  been feeble and insipid indeed: but on that occasion
  a very great interest was excited in the minds of the
  audience, for greater and mightier is He that is in us,
  than the spirit which directs the world; and the more
  we live and walk in the Spirit, the more the might of
  God dwells in us and breathes in our words. The
  doctor then visited his minister, the Rev. Mr. House,
  the very gentleman who had declared that he would
  stop me from preaching in that city, and spoke of me
  to him in such terms as induced the clergyman to ex-
  claim, "Well, if God has sent her, I bid her God's
  speed." The work of the Lord spread throughout the
  city, and amongst people of every denomination; and
  such a revival took place as filled the city with aston-
  ishment; and Mr. House, my former opponent, seeing
  the wonderful works of God, exhorted his congregation
  to be sober and stand at their posts, "for," said he, "I
  perceive that God is about to do a great work in this
  city, therefore be ye still, and know that it is of God."
  Being encouraged by the smiles of my heavenly Father,
## 84
  and animated to increased zeal in his holy cause, I
  went from house to house and preached Christ and
  Him crucified to the people; I even ventured into
  houses of ill fame, and exhorted the debased inmates to
  repent of their sins and turn to Jesus Christ: and
  many of these unfortunate females became the genuine
  disciples of Jesus. I also penetrated into the alleys
  and courts, and the different outskirts of the town,
  where vice and immorality abounded; and it pleased
  God to effect a mighty change in the morals and habits
  of the people, especially in the south quarter of the
  town. I met with many persons here, who called them-
  selves Universalists; but they might more properly be
  named Deistical Sceptics; they pretended to believe that
  the whole human family would eventually be saved,
  irrespectively of their principles and conduct. Many of
  these gentlemen came to hear me preach, at the house
  of a friend, in the skirts of the city, to which I had
  been invited, but very little to their satisfaction; they
  much approved of my prayers, because my intercessions
  included all the human family: but they were unable to
  reconcile them with my preaching, in which I insisted
  on salvation by the remission of sins, through genuine
  faith in the crucified Redeemer; {described?} the lost
  condition of mankind, and exhorted men to flee from
  the wrath to come. Blessed be the Lord, there were
  several of these very persons who believed and turned
  to Him with all their heart; and among them was
  Mrs. Spring, a lady connected with the third Presby-
  terian chapel in the city, who attended at that meet-
  ing with three of her daughters; they were attired in
  mourning for another daughter, who had recently died:
## 85
  and, as I was expatiating, on the attendance of kind
  angels on the death bed scenes of the saints, I observed
  these ladies weeping with great emotion. In a few
  weeks afterwards, I was again invited to spend a few
  days at the same house; and I was then informed
  that this lady and her three daughters had, from that
  evening, evinced a saving conversion to God, having
  been under that sermon convinced of sin, of righteous-
  ness and of judgment to come. Mrs. Spring stated
  that she felt more under that discourse, in reference to
  the death of her daughter, than she did at the time of
  her decease: and from that time they had no rest until
  they obtained the assurance of peace with God, through
  our Lord Jesus Christ: they were soon after introduced
  to me, and I received much kindness from them.
¶ I met with a young woman in the course of my mi-
  nistry in Hartford, who was very unsteady and depraved
  in her habits; her mother was a member of the Methodist
  Society, and at that time ill; she wished me to be sent
  for to visit her, but the daughter insisted that I should
  not come there; or, if I did, she threatened to swear
  and dance in my presence during my visit, and to treat
  me with all possible disrespect. However, this young
  woman was by some means or other induced to come
  and hear me preach; and the Lord was pleased to open
  her heart, that she attended unto the things that were
  spoken; at the conclusion of the service, she came to
  me and invited me to come and visit her mother;
  and the next morning she called upon me again. I
  exhorted her, prayed with and for her, and she became
  so attached to me, that my company was continually
  sought by her: she was soon after admitted into the
## 86
  household of faith, and I afterwards preached in their
  cottage: thus one of my enemies became my child in
  the gospel, and my sister in the Lord.
¶ Intending to take my departure from this city, I
  went to the coach office, and paid my fare, was booked as
  a passenger for the next day, leaving directions for the
  coach to call for me on the following morning; but so
  eager were the people for my further stay amongst
  them, that some of the brethren went and took up my
  fare at the coach office, and would not listen to any
  proposition for my departure. I therefore resumed my
  labours among them, being constantly engaged by day and
  night in the work of the Lord, without an intervening
  cloud, for the space of three months, preaching in the
  chapel on the Lord's-day, and on one evening in the week.
¶ On one occasion, a number of persons, amounting
  to between twenty and thirty, presented themselves in
  the chapel, in great distress, and deep penitence on
  account of their sins. The excess of their emotions
  were such, that the order of worship was suspended;
  for some were calling upon the name of the Lord, some
  were groaning to receive the atonement of Jesus, while
  others were rejoicing in his salvation and giving glory
  to God. Our services were not unfrequently interrupted
  by scenes of this description; for the operations of the
  Holy Ghost can no more be circumscribed within the
  limits of man's arrangement, than the wind and rain
  and sunshine can be restricted to man's times and op-
  portunities. Order in divine worship and in the house
  of God is graceful and appropriate; but the life and
  power of religion is not identified with, nor in propor-
  tion to, the polish of the minister, the respectability of
## 87
  the congregation, or the regularity and method of its
  services: the most abrupt and extraordinary vicissitudes
  of weather are frequently productive of more benefit than
  the nicest graduated scale of temperature; and had it
  not been for some of these instances, in which the
  Almighty displayed the wonders of his victorious grace,
  even though the accustomed proprieties and regularity
  of divine service were at the time abruptly trenched upon
  and suspended, there are many churches now lively
  and flourishing, which, notwithstanding the exactness
  of the order of their worship, and the beauty of their ar-
  rangements, would now be but little more than so many
  religious automata. Our duty is humbly to submit to,
  rather than attempt to limit, the Holy One of Israel;
  and when God is at work, though the ark may seem
  to rock with irregular motion, let not men pretend to
  more wisdom than their Creator, lest, like Uzzah, they
  fall themselves in their attempts to direct His energies,
  and regulate His movements.
¶ My mental hemisphere soon after this became ob-
  scured and cloudy, and my mind became exceedingly
  heavy and sorrowful; satanic spirits also gained access
  to my soul and harrassed me much, and I seemed
  oppressed with fearful forebodings of some impending
  evil; I knew not any cause in myself for this reverse of
  my spiritual condition, and was wholly unable to account
  for, and comprehend the reason thereof. The following
  words constantly ran through my mind during this
  affliction:
V "Lord, what are all my sufferings here,
V If thou but make me meet,
V With that enraptured host to appear
V And worship at thy feet."
## 88
¶ I waded through much gloominess and sorrow; the
  dial of my spirit was beclouded with great darkness,
  and I wept much and frequently; but the cause was
  beyond my comprehension.
¶ The chapel in which I had been preaching was called
  an union chapel, and was not the property of any parti-
  cular sect of Christians; but the majority of the persons
  worshipping therein were Presbyterians; and by them,
  at length, a great jealousy against me was excited,
  fostered and hatched under the influence of the rulers of
  the darkness of this world, professedly on account of
  my being a Methodist. The chapel was to some extent
  involved in debt; and this Presbyterian faction came
  forward before the managers with a proposition to
  procure a minister to supply the pulpit for three months
  free of expense; requesting, at the same time, that I
  might not be informed of their proposal: the volunteer
  preacher was accordingly introduced and tendered his
  services to supply the pulpit every Lord's-day; and
  as the chapel was in debt, the proposition was accepted,
  and the matter arranged and settled. Upon this, one
  of our friends came and informed me, that it had been
  arranged by the managers, that Mr. A. should preach on
  next Lord's-day, in the morning, myself in the afternoon,
  and Mr. B. in the evening: this somewhat enlightened
  my understanding into this mystery of iniquity. I
  attended the morning service on the next Lord's-day,
  and heard Mr. A. preach; and in the afternoon, as I
  was proceeding to the chapel, one of the managers met
  me and informed me he had learnt that Mr. C. was ap-
  pointed to preach there on that afternoon, and advised
  me not to enter the pulpit: thus instructed, I took my
## 89
  seat with the congregation: soon afterwards the deacons
  entered the chapel, and seeing me setting in a private
  seat, they came and desired me to ascend the pulpit
  according to the recent arrangements: I then related
  to them what the manager had said to me; they as-
  sured me his statement was untrue, and urged me to
  take the pulpit; having been informed of all the cir-
  cumstances, when I appeared in the pulpit I was obliged
  to vent my feelings in a shower of tears, before I could
  utter a word; and my dear flock were very much
  affected at the sight; but we afterwards enjoyed a very
  blessed meeting. In the evening, I went again and
  heard the Rev. Mr. B.; there were many of the officials
  present; and on the conclusion of the service the con-
  gregation still kept their seats, none offered to leave,
  but maintained a profound silence, and the eyes of
  many of them were fixed in expectation upon me; I
  felt called forth by the assembly, and rising to my feet,
  I said, If there are any present who feel anxious about
  their souls, and will come forward, we will hold a
  prayer-meeting. A great number then came forward;
  and when they were seated, the preacher descended
  from the pulpit, and with the official gentlemen present,
  without deigning the least notice of me, went and
  conferred with the persons who were seeking the salva-
  tion of their souls, and instructed them in the way
  of life; after which, they announced that their minister
  would preach again on Wednesday evening, and closed
  the meeting, without giving me an opportunity of saying
  a word: this conduct seemed much like gospel rival-
  ship, a thing which unhappily too greatly prevails
  amongst Christians: the apostle Paul intimated that
## 90
  some in his day preached Christ of contention, for the
  purpose of increasing his affliction; and I cannot but
  think that this treatment was intended for my affliction;
  it was too plainly marked to be mistaken; for they all
  sat waiting in mute silence, until I had invited the
  inquiring souls to come forward; and then coolly ob-
  truded their grave admonitions on those who had been
  pricked in their hearts, and were become impatiently
  violent to grasp the kingdom of heaven; shutting me
  out entirely, and concluding with a notice that their
  new minister would preach on the following Wednesday
  evening, and the next Lord's-day; directing those who
  wished for further instructions to apply to them at their
  several residences. My affections were, however, very
  strongly attached to my little flock; and on the Wed-
  nesday evening, I went again to hear the new minister;
  but the Lord said unto me, "It is enough; I will take
  thee away from them, and I will put bands upon thee,
  and thou shalt not go out amongst them; and I will
  make thy tongue cleave to the root of thy mouth, that
  thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be a reprover to
  them, for they are a rebellious house. But when I speak
  unto thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say
  unto them, Thus saith the Lord God, He that heareth,
  let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear:
  for they are a rebellious house." Ezek. iii. 25—27.
  Thus it was partly with me, for on that very night, I
  was suddenly attacked with a very severe fit of illness,
  and confined by it for five weeks, so that I became
  dumb to them indeed. After I had been ill three weeks,
  the Rev. Mr. Moffit, one of our principal Methodist
  preachers, came to Hartford; and, under his ministry,
## 91
  the revival which the Lord had began by my instru-
  mentality was renewed again; the chapel became com-
  pletely deserted, the new minister became discouraged,
  and shortly withdrew altogether.
¶ Mr. Moffit spent several weeks in Hartford, and
  preached every evening in the week for the greater part
  of the time; the people flocked, from every part of
  the town, to his ministry; and many people were
  turned unto the Lord. Many of the Methodists and
  many of my congregation also experienced, under him,
  a great revival of the work of the Lord in their souls.
  Before he left the city, it pleased God to raise me up
  and enable me to go and hear him, and render my
  thanksgivings to God for His great goodness and tender
  care towards me in my illness: before I was able to go
  abroad, those very persons who had treated me so un-
  handsomely called to inquire after my health; and
  expressed their hope that God would bless and restore
  me to health, that I might soon resume my labours
  among them again, saying, that I had already effected
  much good to many souls; but as the Lord had said
  unto me, "when I speak, thou shalt hear: and I will
  put words in thy mouth and thou shalt speak;" on my
  recovery, I left the city for a short time; when I
  returned again, these people were extremely anxious for
  me to preach to them, and by the grace of God, I
  resumed my former station and continued my labours
  amongst them for some time without interruption; the
  Lord having made it increasingly manifest that He had
  sent me, and that my ministry was from Him.
¶ A few weeks before I finally left this city, I learnt
  that Mrs. Adams, the wife of a gentleman in the legal
## 92
  profession, had been dangerously ill for a long time,
  and had expressed a great desire to see me; I, there-
  fore, without an invitation, called at her residence, but
  I was so weak at the time, that when I arrived there
  I fainted, and was taken to bed; when I recovered,
  I was conducted into her chamber, where Mr. Adams,
  and all the family were collected, expecting to see her
  breathe her last; she had been ill so long a time, and
  wasted so much, that her skin had been broken through
  by the pressure of the bones. After a little conversa-
  tion, I inquired if I should pray with her; consent
  being given, I bowed down before God, and lifted up
  my heart in supplication to Him on her behalf. It was
  a time of much power; and all the family were bathed
  in tears. Mrs. Adams' sister accompanied me to the
  door on my retiring, and asked me if I did not think
  her sister was very near her end. I said, 'no: I
  think she will recover, for God showed me this in the
  time of prayer.' She then sent one of the servants to
  lead me home; the next morning I was so ill as to re-
  quire medical aid; and the physician who attended
  Mrs. Adams was sent for. He seemed much pleased
  to communicate to me the intelligence that Mrs. Adams
  was vastly better; and before I left the city, she was
  down stairs, at the head of the family. This circum-
  stance made a great impression on the inhabitants of
  the city, who thought it strange, indeed, that God, in
  answer to my prayer, should heal the sick: the intelli-
  gence flew from street to street, that Mrs. Adams was
  recovered; and those reverend gentlemen, who had so
  strenuously exerted themselves to silence my ministry,
  were themselves completely disconcerted, and their
## 93
  objections silenced. I might add many more of the
  kind and condescending corroborations, the Lord was
  pleased to manifest on my behalf in that city; but
  I forbear narrating any further instances, and leave them
  to be further revealed in the disclosures of another life.
¶ The wonderful revivals of the work of God, some of
  which I have attempted to describe, were not done in
  a corner; but extended throughout the greater part of
  the vast territory of the United States: many were the
  labourers, zealous and devoted their spirits, and inde-
  fatigable their exertions, whom the Lord raised up, and
  sent forth to achieve these blessed conquests, the re-
  ports of which have long since reached the ears even
  of British Christians, and excited amongst them some
  searchings of heart, and some curiosity to have further
  information respecting them; insomuch that I have
  understood that men of high repute for learning and
  wisdom, have been sent over to ascertain the nature,
  as well to investigate the means and extent of those
  great transatlantic revivals: what report of the good
  land they returned with, I have not been informed, but
  generally I have found that the wise and learned have
  seldom experienced much of the heavenly discipline of
  God's Holy Spirit; "the world by wisdom knew not
  God;" and though many Christians are at immense
  pains to acquire the wisdom of this world, God bringeth
  it to nought, and taketh them in their own craftiness;
  He hideth His counsel from the "wise and prudent, and
  revealeth it to babes." The man who would judge of
  so high a matter as a revival of the kingdom of heaven
  upon earth, must be spiritual (he need not be learned)
  himself; for the spiritual man judgeth all things; yea,
## 94
  even the deep things of God, yet he himself is judged
  of no man, for no man can fathom the sacred Urim
  and Thummim, or as St. John says, the holy anointing
  or unction which abides in his soul.
¶ I left Hartford for Boston, in the state of Massa-
  chusets, in company with a lady, who was from
  the latter city: and the Lord went before me and
  cleared up the way; for, in the city of Boston,
  many doors were opened for my reception; and the
  Lord wrought wonderfully among the people. Many
  of the brethren were going to a camp meeting at
  Cape Codd, about sixty miles from Boston, and in-
  vited me to go with them, which I did with great
  pleasure, and we had very pleasant weather. Many
  thousands attended at that meeting, and the Lord
  manifested forth his glory and his grace. Hundreds
  came to that camp-meeting, to make sport and derision
  of the saints, and of their worship, who returned home
  themselves rejoicing in God their Saviour. A band of
  young gentlemen, connected with the highest families
  in the town of Lynn, chartered a large vessel, brought
  their tent, provisions, and every other necessary for a
  week's sojourn on the camp ground, with the wicked
  intention not only of greatly annoying us, but of dis-
  persing the camp meeting altogether: the manner in
  which they approached the encampment rendered it but
  too evident what kind of persons they were, and for
  what purpose they came. When these wanton young
  gentlemen arrived upon the ground, they went from
  tent to tent, and appeared to be greatly struck with
  astonishment at the novel appearance of the scene;
  for the Lord had set the hearts and consciences of the
## 95
  people in motion; some of them were weeping with
  godly penitence; others were rejoicing in the salvation
  of Christ, manifested to their souls; in the public services,
  the ministers were as a flaming torch, and their words
  as a two edged sword; and the powerful discourses
  they preached from the platform, made a wonderful
  impression on these giddy young men, and their conduct
  became greatly altered. On the Thursday, between
  twelve and two o'clock, matters were so changed that
  they prepared their tent for religious service, and sent
  for me to come and preach to them; I went accord-
  ingly, and commenced the meeting, and some of our
  ablest preachers followed soon after and assisted me,
  and the Lord owned and blessed our message, and
  many of these young gentlemen became deeply affected,
  and cried to God for mercy. The ministers evinced
  the greatest attention and tender care of them; but
  they more particularly desired to hear, "the woman:"
  and the next day I was sent for to preach to them
  again; after which, we all attended the prayer meeting
  at the preachers' stand; and many of them found
  mercy with God. When the camp meeting broke up,
  all of them with the exception of four, together with
  many others both white and coloured, manifested the
  triumphs of redeeming grace, and evinced a saving con-
  version to God; and the happy result of that meeting
  was, that, in a short space of time, in the town of
  Lynn alone, upwards of two hundred persons were
  added to the Methodist Episcopal Church.
¶ The brethren residing at the Cape having strongly
  solicited me to tarry for a time with them, I consented,
  and instead of returning with the brethren to Boston,
## 96
  went home with the Cape friends, and travelled with
  the itinerating preachers on the different circuits of the
  Cape district, and with great success; for the glorious
  camp meeting we had just before attended, had laid
  the foundation for an extensive and continuous revival:
  the fields were indeed white, already to harvest; and
  we went to reap them, and receive the rich wages of
  souls for our hire.
¶ In the course of my excursions, I went into the Haverich
  circuit, and entered one of their chapels. After the service
  had commenced, I observed a young man in the assembly
  who appeared to idolise himself, and to soar very high
  into the regions of self-conceit; his excessive self-com-
  placency very much attracted my attention, and I felt
  a desire to have some conversation with him; not sus-
  pecting that there was any probability of its coming
  to pass; but God overrules and arranges matters for
  His people, that they may glorify His name. It hap-
  pened that we went that day to dine with this very
  young gentleman's father-in-law; and during the time
  of dinner he came in. Some one at the table then
  asked him if there were many persons in attendance
  at the meeting in the morning; to which he replied,
  no; adding, that he was a fool in going, for it was
  complete folly to attend those meetings. These words
  came very painfully to my heart; but as I was to
  preach in the afternoon, and required much self-com-
  posure, I passed over his remarks in silence; when the
  service of the afternoon was over, I returned to tea
  with the family, and being now at liberty, having no
  sermon before me to preach, I was not indisposed for
  a colloquy with him; he was also desirous of having
## 97
  some conversation with me, and had prepared himself
  for that purpose; after tea, he came again, and brought
  many others with him to witness his feats of prowess:
  so he promptly commenced an attack upon me, worked
  himself into a great fury, and spouted away for a time;
  but his ammunition was quickly exhausted; his creed,
  if he had any, was that of modified deism; looking
  for a future paradise to be enjoyed by all men indis-
  criminately; he was, however, deplorably ignorant of the
  Scriptures; I replied to him according to the ability
  the Lord gave me; and conviction of the truth went
  with the word, so that he became of the number of
  believers in Christ, and subsequently behaved to me
  with very great kindness—to God be all the praise for
  ever and ever.
¶ My ministry every where, on the Cape, was very
  numerously attended: there were but few buildings
  that could contain the numbers who flocked to hear
  the word of the Lord; as I journied from place to place,
  many an open waggon became my pulpit, from which
  I preached in the open air to listening multitudes, the
  candidates for immortality, and directed them to the
  Lamb of God who taketh away the sins of the world. My
  own soul was filled with heavenly hope, which maketh
  not ashamed; my affections were set upon things above;
  my treasure was in heaven; my hope bloomed with the
  glories of immortality and eternal life: it was the anchor
  of my soul, sure and steadfast; I rejoiced in hope of the
  glory of God; and in my ministry, I determined to be
  conversant with no other topic, to know nothing amongst
  men but Jesus Christ and him crucified. The divine
  treasures which God imparted into my earthen vessel I
## 98
  freely poured out; and the Lord constantly replenished
  me with more; so that I was always being exhausted,
  and ever being filled with the heavenly treasures of
  divine knowledge; and became more and more able to
  bring out of the good treasure in my heart things new
  and old. The Lord enabled me to keep my heart with
  all diligence; and having my own soul right with God,
  I was enabled to set others right also. I affection-
  ately press it upon the attention of every minister of
  the gospel, who really desires that his ministry may be
  effectual to convert and sanctify men, to attend to him-
  self first, to see that the work of genuine conversion
  be perfected in his own heart; that he is truly born
  again of the incorruptible seed of the word of God,
  which liveth and abideth for ever; that he is thoroughly
  cleansed from his old sins; enjoying the remission of
  sins and justification to life; that the word of God
  abideth in him, and is fruitful; that he enjoys the
  spirit of adoption; is sealed with the Holy Spirit of
  promise; that the Holy Ghost dwelleth in him; that
  he comes to the light in every thing; is pure in heart,
  and hath his eye single to the glory of God; that he is
  sanctified by the truth; purified by obeying it; that he
  abideth in Christ the true vine; dwelleth in God and
  God in him; that he hath continual communion with
  the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; that he
  lives and walks in the Spirit; is led by the Spirit; that
  he is not proud of these attainments, but simple and
  of a childlike disposition; that his heart is preserved
  in a state of transparency, and so free from guile and
  sin, that he would not be reluctant to have it probed by
  a truly godly-experienced and judicious Christian of
## 99
  like attainments. Let him see to it that he is meek,
  lowly, patient, contrite and humble, habituated to self-
  denial, filled with charity or love which is the bond
  of perfectness; that his will is entirely submitted and
  resigned to the will of God; that his meat and drink
  is to do the will of his Father in heaven; that his atti-
  tude is that of a self-devoted, living sacrifice, utterly at
  the disposal of his God, taking up every cross placed
  before him; that he meekly and practically regards the
  sayings of Jesus and the precepts of the Christian
  Scriptures, aiming at a perfect observance of them all,
  that he may become a finished disciple of Jesus Christ,
  exercised in all parts of Christian duty and practise,
  and copying the pattern set by his Lord, devoting
  soul and body, time and opportunities, money and
  means, his entire all to the service of Jesus; not wedded
  to this life, but holding it as loosely as possible, rejoicing
  in hope of the glory of God, and seeking an increased
  knowledge of Christ, the fellowship of His sufferings,
  and the spiritual might of His resurrection. Such a
  man as this, if called and sent by Christ into His vine-
  yard, is able to make men wise unto salvation; and is
  the kind of minister whose labours Jesus will deign to
  bless. Such ministers have adorned and blessed the
  church in all ages; and such ministers occasionally
  adorn it still. It is an axiom which holds good in
  Christianity, as well as in common life, that whatever
  man has borne, been, or done, man may bear, be, or
  do; and there is no more impossibility of attaining
  eminent saintship in the present day, than there was
  two thousands of years since: with the Scriptures in
  our hands and the Holy Spirit in our hearts, we possess
## 100
  advantages even beyond those Christians who enjoyed
  the living ministry of the apostles. He who would be
  a master in Israel should possess such an experimental
  knowledge of the Christian religion, as an university
  cannot bestow, but which is the exclusive endowment
  of the Holy Ghost. A well-disciplined minister is a
  father in Christ; an elder in the Christian church; and
  happy is that flock over which the Holy Ghost hath
  made him an overseer: who are fed by him, not with
  college lore, nor with orations such as are emitted by
  divines not yet out of their teens; but with such in-
  structions as the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing
  spiritual things with spiritual. When ministers aim
  at revivals in their flocks, they must first obtain them
  in their own souls; for he who has left his first love, is
  in no condition to communicate the glowing flame to
  others: he must first remember from whence he has
  fallen, and repent, and do his first works; strengthen
  the things that remain; stir up the gift of God in him-
  self; obtain the pure gold of true faith, well tried in the
  fire, and anoint his mental eyes with the illuminating
  eye-salve of divine unction; render his body a temple
  for the Holy Ghost, and equip himself with the whole
  armour of God, and then he may efficiently contribute
  to the health and prosperity of the souls of others; being
  a discerning, faithful watchman, and a good shepherd
  to them. I have witnessed uch ministers, (who are
  rightly named 'Great Grace',) lay open the heart, cast
  down imaginations and every high thing that exalteth
  itself against the knowledge of God: and with the
  Spirit's two-edged sword, divide the sinner from his
  sins, slay the lion, and bring him a lamb-like penitent
## 101
  to the feet of Jesus; then take the new creature by the
  hand, lead him by the side of still waters, in paths of
  righteousness; comfort, exhort, warn, instruct, and
  build him up in our most holy faith, that he may even-
  tually have the joy to present him faultless and perfect
  in Christ Jesus. Oh! that every leader of souls in
  Britain may speedily become a Joshua, to bring all the
  Lord's Israel into the promised rest of faith.
¶ In the course of my travels on the Cape, I one day
  met with a young lady recently married, whose pride
  and self-consequence were superlatively high; her
  parents, brothers and sisters were decidedly religious;
  but her vanity and haughtiness had hitherto resisted the
  humbling impressions of true godliness. I felt my mind
  much drawn after this young lady, but she rejected every
  advance of mine, and contemptuously avoided my con-
  versation. I spent a day at her father's house; during
  which time she was with us; but she sat as a queen, and
  maintained all the dignity of haughty reserve to every
  religious topic; at night, we had family prayer; and I
  followed the impressions of my mind, in fervently praying
  for her; and took my leave of the family. In about
  two years afterwards, I again met with her mother, who
  informed me that, on that evening, this young lady was
  brought to repentance towards God: she was afflicted
  with penitential anguish to an extraordinary degree, ere
  she was enabled to exercise faith in our Lord Jesus
  Christ; since that time, she evinced as great anxiety to
  see and unbosom her mind to me as she had previously
  to shun and repulse me. Verily, God doeth all things
  well: all praise to His glorious wisdom and power; His
  rich and free mercy, and adorable grace.
## 102
¶ Having reaped a rich harvest of souls on the Cape, I
  returned to the city of Boston, where I remained for a
  few months; the Lord having made my way prosperous,
  many doors were opened to me, the word of God had
  free course and was glorified; many who sat in darkness
  there saw the great and the true light, and turned to
  the Lord with all their heart; from thence I proceeded
  to the city of Salem, and laboured amongst the Method-
  ists with much attendant prosperity. The coloured
  people had a chapel in course of erection, and stood in
  great need of assistance; the Methodist brethren there-
  fore, in conjunction with several gentlemen in the city,
  subscribed a considerable sum of money, with which
  they furnished them with a pulpit and seats for the
  chapel. When the building was got in readiness, I
  delivered the first discourse therein, from Zech. ii. 10,
  "Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion; for I come, and
  I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord." The
  Lord graciously manifested and recorded His name there
  on that occasion; and many considered their ways, and
  turned from their vanities to serve the living God. The
  Lord was pleased also to apply a portion of His word
  with much power to my own soul, as it was delivered
  by His angel. Zech iii. 7. "Thus saith the Lord of
  Hosts, if thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt
  keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house
  and shalt also keep my courts, and I will give thee
  places to walk among these that stand by."
¶ In that city, the ladies who were connected with
  the several Christian denominations, were in the habit
  of holding a monthly union prayer-meeting together;
  and as this brought the different denominations into
## 103
  closer contact with each other, it caused a rich inter-
  course of sanctified gifts and graces amongst them, for
  the edification of the general body; it also greatly pro-
  moted Christian love, for the pure, genial currents supplied
  by genuine gospel faith, purified the disciples from party
  bigotry, and caused them to love one another for the
  truth's sake. It was delightful indeed to hear Episco-
  palians, Presbyterians, Baptists, and Methodists, avow
  the rich enjoyments they had in the spirit of adoption
  from God, who gave forth the corroborating testimony
  of His divine witness with their spirits to their heavenly
  filiations. The Christian church should manifest one
  fold and one shepherd; one body and spirit; one hope,
  one Lord, one faith, one baptism; and one God and father
  of all who is above all, and through all, and in all. O
  that the Christian community in Great Britain were all
  of one heart and one soul; only, but earnestly, contend-
  ing for the faith once delivered to the saints; that there
  were no divisions among them, but all were speaking
  the same things, and perfectly joined together in the
  same mind, and in the same judgment; none being
  puffed up one against another, knowing that minis-
  terial partizanship, doctrinal divisions, and sectarian pre-
  judices flow from sheer carnality, and savours nothing
  of the grace of God. Rom. xvi. 17. 1 Cor iii. 3. Dur-
  ing my stay in Salem, a great alteration was effected in
  the morals of the colored friends; I hope to be forgiven
  by my English brethren, in saying, that it is not an
  uncommon thing for white Christians to reprobate the
  morals of their sable brethren, without an adequate
  occasion; the intelligence, the circumstances, and the
  habits of the two races are widely different: and it is
## 104
  the part of a moted eye and biassed heart to require the
  same standard tale of bricks from the Ethiopean family!
  Or, in other words, an observance by them of all the
  proprieties attached to the refined Christian morals of
  the more cultivated Saxon stock; the illiterate colored
  Christian is competent to, and ought, practically, to
  carry out the precepts of the Christian religion to the
  utmost extent his circumstances admit of; but Chris-
  tian charity will not rashly judge him, for an imperfect
  conformity to the politer standard of morals and tasteful
  delicacy, which have been superadded to the Christian
  precept, by the supererogative pride of high-toned sen-
  sibility and civilization; a more perfect exemplification
  of Christian morals than that which characterized the
  apostolic era has never been attained by any later age;
  but its simplicity and want of polish would have pre-
  sented a very rude and vulgar exhibition in contrast with
  the whited exterior, the artificial delicacy and current
  respectabilty or pride of life of much of the present-day
  Christianity. The immoralities of the Abyssinian brethren,
  when they occur, are obvious and glaring, and are easily
  visited and purged by the discipline of the church;
  but those of more polished Christians too often flow in a
  deep and mighty under current: no principles are more
  vicious, no practices more immoral and debasing, than
  covetousness and worldly pride; the Scriptures exclude
  those who are guilty of them from any inheritance in
  the kingdom of God and Christ; yet it is a fact but too
  well known, that these vices have an unrestrained course
  throughout the more civilized Christian communities; and
  that an attempt to expel these immoralities from those
  communities, by subjecting all such offenders to the
## 105
  discipline of the church, would fill with confusion, and
  crumble to ruins every denominational superstructure in
  Christendom.
¶ The Lord's blessing on my visit to Salem was made
  apparent by the improvement which followed in the
  morals and habits of the colored population; many of
  whom became truly devout, righteous, holy, godly,
  spiritual, and heavenly-minded: by devout, I mean,
  devotional and religious; righteousness consists in
  being and doing right; holiness is purity internally and
  practically. Godliness is an assimilation of the human
  character to that of our heavenly Father; spirituality is
  such a practical acquaintance with spiritual things, and
  abiding sense of the existence and agency of spiritual
  and invisible beings, and converse with them, as gives
  a complete ascendancy to the moral and mental powers
  over the animal propensites; but it more especially com-
  sists in a discernment o the presence and operations of
  the Holy Spirit, fellowship with God and his Son Jesus
  Christ, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, together
  with an habitual and deep consciousness, and a bloom-
  ing prospect of the momentous realities of a future life.
  Heavenly-mindedness consists in having our mind and
  hope fixed upon the things above; on the mercy-seat
  and throne of grace, the heavenly Jesusalem; the man-
  sions which Jesus is preparing for us there; the heavenly
  Mount Zion; the general assembly and church, of the
  first-born; the innumerable company of angels; the
  blood of sprinkling; the mediator and high-priest of the
  new covenant; and upon God the judge of all. Many
  of my sable brethren became eminently spiritual, hav-
  ing ceased to be led by their animal appetites and
## 106
  worldly lusts, they were led by the Holy Spirit of God
  which dwelt in them, and whose temples they were.
  In the Methodist connexion, also, I had an extensive
  circle of young ladies who were constant attendants upon
  my ministry, and who were in an especial manner my
  charge in the Lord; these manifested great diligence in
  their pursuit of the higher attainments of experimental
  spirituality. The love of God being richly shed abroad
  in their hearts by the Holy Ghost, many of them at-
  tained to considerable eminence in the apprehension of,
  and conformity to, the love of Christ, which passeth
  knowledge; abiding in Christ, dwelling in God, and
  walking in the light as God is in the light, they ex-
  perienced that perfect love which casteth out fear; the
  holy vigour and zeal with which they pressed forward
  after the life of God, the avidity with which they drank
  until they were filled with the Spirit, and the won-
  derful revelations God was pleased to manifest to them,
  provoked me to run forward in the heavenly race with
  increased earnestness, lest they should overtake, and
  leave me behind them: but as the Lord set me as their
  leader, He sustained me as such; and an abundance of
  grace was given to me as His commissioned servant, to
  maintain my leadership. I abode in Salem throughout
  the winter, and a most delightful winter it was.
¶ I also paid a visit to the friends at Lynn; a town to
  which reference has already been made; the Rev. J.
  Melvill was the minister stationed there, who invited
  me to preach in his pulpit, which I did to an overflow-
  ing audience: on that occasion, I had the happiness to
  see many of those dear young men who had attended
  the camp-meeting as before narrated. On the conclu-
## 107
  sion of the service, they formed themselves into two
  ranks down the aisle of the chapel in order to salute
  me as I passed betwixt them; and we parted in the
  hope of a joyful meeting on the morning of the
  resurrection.
¶ From Salem I again returned to Boston, which city I
  left in May, 1830, in company with a Mrs. Ruby, who
  had been thither on a visit, and was now returning to
  Portland, in the State of Maine, in the north-eastern par
  of America. We had a pleasant passage by water; the
  night was calm, and we reached Portland about eight
  o'clock in the morning. It is a beautiful city, situated
  on the sea coast; built on a considerable elevation, and
  the houses being white, it presents a very conspicuous
  and fine appearance from the sea.
¶ On my arrival, I found the friends to be a very bene-
  volent and kind-hearted people: they gave me a very
  cordial reception; we quickly became well acquainted
  and at home in each other's company, and it was a
  blessed visit to my own soul an to their souls also. The
  Abyssinian chapel, a very neat and pretty erection, was
  appropriated to my service: and the news of a female being
  about to preach therein, attracted a great number of per-
  sons from all parts of the city; the Lord applied my mes-
  sage to the hearts of many of them, and they cried to
  Him for mercy, they sought Him with their whole heart,
  and He was found of them to be a God merciful and gra-
  cious, pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin; and like
  the eunuch, they went on their way rejoicing. The chapel
  was constantly filled during my stay, amongst them:
  many were made happy in the love of God, enjoyed a
  sense of His approbation and the witness of His Spirit
## 108
  with their spirits that they were the children of God;
  many strangers were continually attracted to the chapel;
  and on one Lord's day, a gentleman was present whose
  emotion was so strong as to excite much attention; he
  at length retired to the lobby where he vented his feel-
  ings in sobs and tears: he stated to one of the brethren
  that he was a sea-captain, a stranger to earthly fears,
  that his heart was attracted and rivetted by the dis-
  course which was in the course of delivery, so that he
  could not retire from the place; but being unable to
  repress his feelings, and desirous of evading observation,
  he preferred standing in the lobby. Another person
  was there also under similar circumstances, who called
  upon me the next day, and informed me that he had
  been a sailor during the last forty years, and had en-
  countered every form of marine danger: that he had
  belonged to a ship of war, and been accustomed to the
  roaring of cannons, and all the tragic horrors of naval
  warfare, but never had felt dismayed by any accumula-
  tion of peril; he now wept bitterly, and we both knelt
  before the Lord in supplication, and the Lord heard
  and spoke peace to his soul. Many other instances of
  the Lord's especial favour to me, and blessing upon
  my ministerial labours in that city I might relate; but
  the limits I am compelled to assign to the compass of
  this volume require their omission.
¶ After remaining a few mo ths in Portland, I was
  moved to travel further into the State of Maine, and I
  journied in company with Mr. Black, a Baptist minister
  to the town of Brunswick; a town eminent in the State
  for its literary institutions. Mr. Black preached there
  on the Lord's-day, and I was invited to occupy the
## 109
  pulpit of the Baptist chapel on the Monday evening;
  which I did, and preached to a very crowded auditory,
  of whom a large number were collegians: at the close
  of the meeting, I was invited to preach there again.
  After this, my mind was impressed that I must go to
  Bath; a town about ten miles distant; though I had
  received no invitation, possessed no introductory means
  to any one, neither knew any person there, and had been
  informed that the town was not inhabited by one person
  of colour; my mind was therefore somewhat saddened
  on account of this impression; I knew not how to pro-
  ceed in it; and committed my way unto God, who in
  His own way and time brought it to pass.
¶ In a few days I went to preach at a small country
  village; and, a female from Bath being present at the
  meeting, I sent a message by her to the religious peo-
  ple of Bath, requesting permission to come and preach
  to them; this was the first time in my life that I had
  ever requested as a favour to myself, that which in the
  nature of things is the communication of a favour. In
  a few days I received an answer from them, intimating
  that they neither knew nor had heard of me previously;
  but that they regularly held a prayer-meeting at certain
  times at a certain house about a mile from the town, at
  which I might attend if I thought proper.
¶ Although this reply seemed rather uncourteous and
  grating to the feelings, yet the matter was from the
  Lord, and I durst not refuse even an invitation so un-
  couth. Accordingly a kind sister conveyed me in her
  chaise to the place on the day of their next prayer meet-
  ing: having alighted, we inquired of the housewife if
  that was the meeting-house; she admitted that it was;
## 110
  'but,' says she, 'who asked you to come here?' Having
  given her the name of the friend who had sent to me, she
  added, 'Oh! then go to him, go to him, he will tell
  you all about it.' It is to be deplored that some Chris-
  tians have 'Nabal' so prominently inscribed upon their
  tempers, that they display an equal moroseness with
  the canine snarlers: such are unmindful of the authority
  and disobedient to the laws of their Master, by which
  they are required to be courteous, gentle and kind;
  and they greatly disgrace the Christian profession by
  their churlishness. We departed from that surly abode,
  and went into the town; but were unable to find one
  person belonging to the society or who knew anything
  of our coming; nor could any of them accommodate us
  with a night's lodging: we therefore rode back to the
  house where the meeting was to be held, and the time
  for its commencement was nearly arrived. We again
  alighted and knocked at the door, and it was opened
  by the female before mentioned, who, when she saw us,
  shut it again in our faces and turned away. As she did
  not lock the door, I opened it and entered into the
  house. A great many people and the preachers were
  already assembled; I sat down in the meeting and re-
  flected on the repulsive reception I had met with; and
  conscious that I had now discharged my duty before
  God, I resolved, if not requested to preach, to sit in
  silence and wait before Him.
¶ When the time for service arrived, one of the preach-
  ers came to me and said, 'Sister, I suppose you wish
  to addres the meeting,' to which I assented: and as he
  stated that the assembly were desirous of hearing me, I
  went into the desk opened the meeting, and preached
## 111
  from Isaiah xlviii. 18, 'Oh, that thou hadst hearkened
  to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a
  river; and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea."
  The audience were very numerous and attentive; much
  feeling was excited and many tears were shed, for the
  Lord was with me in the work, to give efficacy to the
  word of His grace. At the conclusion of the service,
  the society were detained to consult on matters of their
  own; and I retired to prepare for my departure. When
  we were ready to enter the chaise, some of the sisters
  came to us, and informed me that I might be accom-
  modated with a lodging at the residence of a lady
  in the neighbourhood; but as they did not assign
  any object for my further stay with them, I de-
  clined the offer, and departed. I afterwards learnt
  that they had been consulting about my preaching in
  the town on the next Lord's day, and had arranged for
  me so to do; though they did not then inform me of it.
  After the sermon, my soul was filled with an inex-
  pressibly sweet serenity and heavenly peace. On our
  way home we called at a house on Brunswick plains,
  which is midway betwixt the two towns, where one of
  our friends resided; and as they were preparing supper
  for us, I sat in thoughtful meditation on the varied
  goodness of God towards me; and looking upwards, the
  Lord opened my eyes, and I distinctly saw five angels
  hovering above and engaged in the praises of God: the
  raptures of my soul were too awful and ecstatic on that
  occasion for human description: the sensual world are
  unacquainted with the overwhelming fascinations which
  thrill through every instinct of the spiritual mind under
  the complacent manifestation of etherial intelligencies
## 112
  and their enchanting influence. I concluded that this
  wonderful manifestation was a token for good, and
  a proof that the Lord was well pleased with the
  course I had taken; and I was encouraged to hold
  several meetings thoughout the week, and preached on
  the Lord's day twice on the plains, and once in Bruns-
  wick. I learnt, in the meantime, that a great curiosity
  had been excited in Bath on account of my visit to that
  place, and that I was anxiously expected there again.
  On the Lord's day morning, immediately after I had
  commenced the service, one of the Bath preachers came
  in, and when the service was over, informed me that he
  was directed to conduct me to Bath to preach there in
  the evening; but being then engaged to preach in Bruns-
  wick in the evening, he was much disappointed at my
  declining his invitation; however, I promised to call and
  preach there when on my journey to Bangor, to which
  town I purposed shortly to go: in a short time,
  taking leave of the friends at Brunswick, went to Bath,
  and was very kindly received by Mr. Wilkinson, one of
  the preachers: in the evening I preached in their spa-
  cious chapel to a very large and attentive audience:
  after service they made a collection, the whole of which
  they generously presented to me; being a larger sum
  than I had received from any other congregation in the
  State of Maine; they then earnestly requested me to
  remain a few days with them, and preach again ere I
  proceeded on my journey, to which I was constrained
  to consent. As the immense concourse retired from
  the chapel, the noise of so many hundreds of feet
  unbroken by any human articulation was very remark-
  able, and excited the surprise of some of the friends
## 113
  as being very unusual in that town; but the people
  obviously had
V "A while forgot their earthly cares,
V And soared above this vale of tears,
V To yon celestial hill."
¶ I attended the different meetings of their classes
  during my stay there, and enjoyed a very pleasant visit
  among them; and, having preached to them again, they
  gave me letters of recommendation to the methodist
  ministers who resided along the course of my journey
  through the State. I could not but gratefully regard
  the kind dealings of my Heavenly Father towards me in
  my visits to this people; although my reception was so
  rude and repulsive at the first, yet my way was en
  larged, my messages welcomed, and my subsequent
  treatment warmly cordial and affectionate: such are
  frequently the ways in which the Lord conducts His
  saints—
V "Behind a frowning Providence,
V He hides a smiling face."
¶ Having preached to them on the Thursday evening,
  my departure was arranged for the morrow; the friends
  having obtained my promise, that, with the Lord's per-
  mission, I would come and preach to them again on
  my return. On the morning, before I left, the superin-
  tendent minister of the Circuit came on a visit to Bath
  from Augusta; and hearing of my preaching there,
  treated it at first as many other ministers do, with great
  contempt, and reprobated the ministry of a female;
  but after hearing somewhat more of the matter, his sen-
  timents became changed, he was introduced to me, and
  became one of my very kind friends.
## 114
¶ It is true, that in the ordinary course of Church ar-
  rangement and order, the Apostle Paul laid it down as
  a rule, that females should not speak in the church, nor
  be suffered to teach; but the Scriptures make it evident
  that this rule was not intended to limit the extraordi-
  nary directions of the Holy Ghost, in reference to
  female Evangelists, or oracular sisters; nor to be rigidly
  observed in peculiar circumstances. St. Paul himself
  attests that Phœbe was a servant or deaconess of the
  Church at Cenchrea; and as such was employed by
  the Church to manage some of their affairs; and it was
  strange indeed, if she was required to receive the com-
  missions of the Church in mute silence, and not allowed
  to utter a syllable before them. The apostle John wrote
  his second epistle to a Christian lady, as a matron of
  eminence and authority; exhorting her believing
  children by her, and bidding her to prove the doctrines
  of those who visited her in the capacity of Christian
  teachers: honourable mention is made of many other
  Christian females who promoted the cause of Jesus;
  and Paul wished every assistance to be given to those
  women who laboured with him in the Gospel. Tryphena
  laboured with Tryphosa in the Lord; mention is made
  of the services of many of the sisters of Nereus, of the
  mother of Rufus, many others are also very respectfully
  referred to by St. Paul the prophet Joel predicted that
  God would pour His Spirit on His handmaids, and that
  they should prophecy as well a His servants; and this
  prophecy, Peter, on the day of Pentecost, asserted was
  fulfilled; and if so, the Christian dispensation has for
  its main feature the inspirations of the holy prophetic
  Spirit, descending on the handmaids as well as on the
## 115
  servants of God; and thus qualifying both for the con-
  version of men, and spread of the Gospel. Priscilla
  took upon herself the work of a teacher, when, in con-
  junction with her husband Aquila, she expounded to
  Apollos the way of God more perfectly; the four virgin
  daughters of Philip the Evangelist, were prophetesses
  or exhorters, probably assisting their father in his evan-
  gelic labours: being prophetesses or exhorters, the
  work in which they were employed was prophecy or
  exhortation; and those brethren certainly err, who
  fetter all and every ecclesiastical circumstance, and even
  the extraordinary inspirations of the Holy Spirit with
  the regulations given by the apostle to a church, the
  brethren of which extensively possessed the gift of
  utterance, and were therefore in no need of female
  speakers; and a Church, too, which owing to its
  disorders and excesses, required the most stringent rules
  for its proper regulation. The superintendent minister
  desired me to tarry some days in Augusta; furnished
  me with letters of introduction to the brethren there,
  and in the event of the preacher, who was appointed to
  preach on the following Lord's day in his stead; failing
  to come, he made the necessary arrangements, and
  directed me to supply his lack of service. I set off for
  Augusta in the steam boat at two o'clock, P.M., and
  arrived there at nine in the evening; and it being dark,
  I was unable to find the inn to which I had been
  directed; but the Lord was with me to preserve me.
  Being alone so late at night, I felt uncomfortable, as a
  female and a stranger, and wandered about until I came
  to the principal hotel, into which I entered and received
  great kindness from the landlord. In the morning he
## 116
  went himself to Mr. Robinson, and informed him I was
  inquiring for him, whereupon that gentleman came to
  the hotel for me, conducted me to his house, and very
  kindly entertained me. From the moment I consented
  to tarry in Augusta, till the next Lord's day, I felt a very
  heavy cloud upon my soul, for I had received no direc-
  tion from the Lord upon it, but had acted upon my own
  judgment. I went mourning by day, and passed two
  nights in sleepless sorrow. Mr. Robinson informed me
  that the committee of the society were about to meet in
  the evening, that the question of my preaching there
  must be submitted to them, and he would inform me of
  their decision, but the time passed by and I heard no-
  thing thereof. On the Lord's day morning, after break-
  fast, as I was praying in private to my heavenly Father,
  and desiring to know why my soul was thus shut up in
  confusion and obscurity, the Lord was pleased to give
  me this answer, "Thus saith the Lord, the brethren are
  divided in their sentiments; nevertheless, though clouds
  and darkness be with thee, I will deliver thee; my pre-
  sence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest." I
  then went into the parlour, and said to Mrs. Robinson,
  "My dear madam, since my coming here, I have not
  enjoyed that rich endowment of the light of the Holy
  Spirit which I usually experience, nor could I imagine
  the reason thereof. I further stated, that my heavenly
  Father had showed me the re son, viz., that I have
  come amongst a people who are divided in their senti-
  ments; and that the brethren are not perfectly joined
  together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.
  She then burst into a flood of tears, and said, "Well,
  if they will not receive those whom God is pleased to
## 117
  send, we cannot help it." When the time came for
  morning service, I accompanied Mr. and Mrs. Robinson
  to the chapel. The congregation assembled, but the
  minister, who was appointed to preach, did not come:
  after waiting some time for the preacher, and he not
  coming, Mr. R. came and requested me to take the
  pulpit; but having made no preparation whatever
  to conduct the public services, I declined, stating that
  I had no desire to intrude myself upon the attention of
  the congregation contrary to the feeling of the church;
  upon this, a gentleman present said he would not bind
  the rest of the brethren by his peculiar view; that he
  would go to another meeting, and leave them at
  liberty to act as they pleased. He then withdrew;
  and one of the brethren rose and assured me that all the
  brethren present were of one mind as to my preaching;
  and hoped that I would consider myself amongst my
  friends and not feel the least embarrassment.
¶ I then repaired to the desk, and conducted the
  service, though with but little of my accustomed
  unction and freedom. In the afternoon, however, it
  pleased God to grant us a time of refreshing indeed.
  The chapel, which was large and commodious, was
  densely crowded; and, at the conclusion, one of the
  brethren arose and proclaimed that a meeting would be
  held there in the evening also; and in the evening, so
  great was the concourse, that crowds remained at the
  chapel doors unable to gain an entrance; and numbers
  were forced to retire disappointed of any accommodation.
  The presence of the Holy One was also manifested, and
  the glory of God filled the house. Although greatly
  fatigued with the exertions of this day, at five o'clock
## 118
  on the following morning, I took the stage for Bangor,
  and rode seventy miles that day over a remarkably uneven
  ground, sometimes ascending the sides of the moun-
  tains, and at other times jolting through the rocky
  valleys. After a very fatiguing journey we arrived at
  Bangor at four o'clock, P. M., and I was kindly received
  by Mr. Brown, a very respectable gentleman of colour,
  who stood in high repute among the people: this
  gentleman went and apprised the Methodist preacher
  of my arrival: who soon came to see me, and gave me
  invitations to the pulpit, the classes, and the family in
  which he resided. I attended their quarterly meeting,
  and also a love feast, with very great enjoyment and profit
  to my own soul: the meeting was attended with divine
  power of very perceptible density; the people spoke
  with great feeling, and fluent utterance; the Spirit of the
  Lord directed and inspired the meeting, and much good
  was effected on that occasion. My visit to Bangor was
  replete with reciprocal benefits to them and myself. I
  truly saw there the grace of God, and was glad; for the
  Lord sent the Spirit of His Son into the hearts of many,
  crying, Abba, Father! and sealed them with His Holy
  Spirit of promise. After remaining with them a few
  days, I took my leave of them and returned by the route
  by which I came. The day was very rainy; and the
  coach was closely shut up, that no inside passenger
  could be seen; nevertheless, I had not been in Augusta
  an hour, before Mr. Robinson c me to the house where
  I was, to engage me to preach in the chapel that evening.
  I accordingly, went and preached, during one of the
  most terrific thunder-storms I ever witnessed; the hea-
  vens gathered blackness; the God of glory thundered,
## 119
  He uttered His voice, and that a mighty voice, which
  divided the flames of fire: the awfulness of the evening
  gave an increased solemnity to the service; in the night
  a vessel was lost upon the coast; and all hands except
  two perished. In the morning I went by the stage coach
  to Bath; and two young men, the only survivors of
  the crew of the wrecked vessel were amongst the pas-
  sengers. I was very kindly received by my dear friends
  in Bath; and, according to previous engagement, I
  preached in their Chapel in the evening; and a delight-
  ful visitation of the love of God was enjoyed by the con-
  gregation. I felt a most spiritual union with this people,
  which I believe will be renewed with increased delights
  in the world of bliss; the Lord had enabled me to
  endure with meekness and patience, the repulsive
  treatment I met with from them on my first introduction
  amongst them; and we afterwards became more closely
  united and endeared to each other, than we perhaps
  might have been, if my first reception had been more
  courteous; their subsequent behaviour was full of
  kindness and tender affection; we enjoyed many happy
  hours in each other's company, and the time of my
  departure was painfully affecting. I then returned to
  Portland, after an absence of about three months; and
  after an abode there of some few weeks, I journeyed to
  another part of the Lord's heritage, going from one town
  to another, the Lord having opened many doors to me,
  and given me access to every denomination of Christians,
  my labours greatly abounded. My earthen vessel was
  continually exhausted, and as continually replenished;
  my bodily frame was often wearied in the service of
  my Saviour, Proprietor and Lord; and many an
## 120
  hospitable home was opened by his providential care, to
  furnish me with refreshment and repose.
V "Here I raise my Ebenezer,
V Hither by thy help I've come,
V And I hope, by thy good pleasure,
V Safely to arrive at home."
¶ At one little town that I visited, it having been an-
  nounced that I should preach in a large school room
  usually appropriated for that purpose; when I was pro-
  ceeding thither, accompanied by some friends, at
  the time appointed, my mind suddenly became dis-
  quieted; and I said, 'what is the matter, for I feel
  that there is something not right; the friends who were
  with me, however, made light of my inquiry; but it
  soon appeared that some dissolute and ruffianly persons
  had conspired together to come and break up the
  meeting; and they had so far intimidated the brethren
  who should have opened the doors, that they durst not
  go forward to prepare the place! One of the sisters
  then procured the key, and opened the room. A great
  concourse of people assembled; and I commenced the
  service in entire ignorance of the disturbance which was
  projected. In a short time afterwards the conspirators
  entered the room, their leader tarrying at the door;
  the power of the Lord was visibly present; and the
  rabble were overawed and restrained from then purpose.
  Their champion growing impatient, then made his ap-
  pearance—an unusually stout and ferocious looking
  man: he came close up to me, making a demonstration
  as if he intended to seize or strike me, but this producing
  no impression upon me, he stood over me as if he would
  take my life; but God was with me, and I felt no fear. He
## 121
  then seated himself beside his companions, pulled their
  hair, and groaned aloud, in derision of the Methodists!
  Those groans rested upon my spirit; the thread of my
  discourse was suspended, and I was directed to rebuke
  and exhort him personally, telling him that those groans
  would soon be repeated in reality; and it was not im-
  probable that he might be suddenly cut off from the
  land of the living, and required to give a woeful account
  of himself at the bar of God. I thus cleared my soul
  of his blood, and left him in the hands of God. On the
  next day, as I was walking in the town, this very man
  came and civilly accosted me, and invited me to call at
  his house, which I did, and prayed with him and his
  family, and departed. Proceeding further, I met with
  the gang of his confederates; who addressed me, and
  entreated my forgiveness for their misbehaviour on the
  previous evening; and while I assured them of my
  forgiveness, I exhorted them to seek forgiveness from
  God, whose majesty had been insulted by their dis-
  respectful conduct toward His servants and the ordinance
  of His worship. I then left the town; and, in a few
  days afterwards, I learnt that their champion had died
  suddenly, from the rupture of a blood-vessel in the lungs!
  having gone from his house but fifteen minutes before in
  perfect health: this event made a deep impression on
  the minds of the people in that locality, and caused the
  fear of God to rest upon many. I then visited another
  part of that country, where an abundant field of labour
  was presented before me; and the Lord applied His word
  as a two-edged sword, to the conviction and awakening
  of many souls; but lest I should be too much elated
  with my ministerial prosperity, my course received a
## 122
  check by the oversetting of the chaise in which I was
  returning one evening from the house of God, by which
  my ancle was broken, and I was laid by for a time; but
  after a few months, my hurt was recovered, and I resumed
  my work in the vineyard of the Lord. I then returned
  to Portland, and thence proceeded to Boston, which I
  left for Rhode Island; where I passed some time amongst
  the Christian brethren. In the town of Providence there
  was a great shaking among the dry bones; the Spirit of
  God entered into them, and many began to live. I pro-
  ceeded from thence to New Bedford, where I was cordially
  received by the minister of the Freewill Baptist congre-
  gation. I preached there many times; and then went
  to the Island of Nantucket, intending, in a few days, to
  return to New York and see my daughter, from whom I
  had been absent more than two years, and whom I had
  a great desire to see: but God ordered it otherwise; for
  when about to sail for New York, the wind shifted, and
  was so contrary, that the vessel could not go out of the
  harbour, and I returned again on shore to the house of
  my friend; before the wind became favourable, I was
  attacked wirh a very severe fit of illness, by which I
  was confined for a long time: I therefore sent for my
  daughter to come to me; and, on her arrival, the inter-
  view was very affecting to us both. The physician gave
  no hopes of my recovery, but prayer was made on my
  behalf by day and night. M ss Sarah M. Coffin, a
  young lady in the vicinity, incessantly visited me, and
  prayed much and fervently for me. One evening, while
  praying by my bed-side, she used these words, which
  were written on my heart as with an iron pen, or the
  point of a diamond—"Lord, if consistent with thy
## 123
  will, spare our sister Elaw, and take my life in her
  stead; for she is useful to thy cause, and I am but a
  feeble worm, and but of little worth." Her affection
  for me was as great as that of Aquila and Priscilla for
  St. Paul, who would have laid down their own necks
  upon the block for him. One day I was so ill, that my
  attendants were expecting my breath to cease. The
  medical attendant came in, and informed them, that
  he was about to fetch the principal physician on the
  island to see me. The friends were then sitting around
  me, and an elderly lady, a Baptist, came into the
  chamber, sat down, and looked at me awhile, and then
  said, "Mrs. Elaw, I am bidden to tell you, that you
  will get better; God has a great work for you yet to
  do, and I think you will travel some thousands of miles
  yet." On her departure, our second preacher came
  in, and such was the weakness of my faith in the word
  of Him who had said, "Thou shalt see London, and
  declare my name there," that I requested the minister
  to attend my funeral; gave him a portion of Scripture
  to preach from, and the hymns I wished to be sung on
  the occasion. Having promised compliance, if the event
  so required, he kneeled down and prayed the Lord to
  grant that I might yet be raised up, to stand forth in
  the name of God and declare His truth. While he was
  praying, I felt the evidence of the Holy Spirit, witness-
  ing, that his prayer was heard, and that God had
  granted the request of his lips. From that very hour
  I began to amend; and some time after, Miss Coffin
  came in and asked how I was, saying, that she had re-
  quested a lady with whom she was acquainted, a Qua-
  keress, to make special prayer to the Lord for me; for
## 124
  said she, "We cannot have thee die." She further stated
  that the friendly Quakeress had waited upon God on
  my behalf, and had received this answer by the Holy
  Ghost: "She shall get better, and in this Island shall
  hereafter be her home." As far as my own mind was
  concerned, I had no anxiety either to live or die, know-
  ing, that for me to live would be for Christ's service, but
  to die, my gain. I sometimes thought, I shall never
  see England: yet it was generally met by an internal
  whisper, "the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." How-
  ever after an illness of eight months' duration, my health
  was re-established, and I was again brought forth to the
  service of my heavenly master; and the kind friends
  would not consent for me to leave the island: my
  daughter also married and settled in it, thus verifying
  the prediction of the prophetess, that my home should
  hereafter be on this delightful spot. The Lord thus
  established my goings here; and, as my strength in-
  creased, so also did my labours. I had a numerous class
  to lead, and much employment in the ministry also.
  There were two chapels in the occupation of the society;
  in the one, situated in the upper part of the town, I
  statedly preached on the Lord's-day afternoon; and,
  in the evening, I assisted our beloved minister in the
  large chapel, where we enjoyed a little heaven below.
  Numerous souls were awakened and converted to God;
  and inquiry after the way of life and salvation was
  prevalent in every part of the town. The work of God
  was our entire pursuit; and we knew nothing among
  the people, but Jesus Christ, and Him crucified. I was
  constantly going from house to house, both early and
  late; and thus I spent two happy years in the pleasant
## 125
  island of Nantucket, the Lord blessing both my going
  out and my coming in.
¶ I afterwards took my daughter with me, and went
  into the land of our nativity to visit our brethren and
  see how they did: we came to the city of Philadelphia,
  had a joyful meeting with our brethren, and abode in
  that city for a little space: while there, I engaged to
  go to a small town at some distance, whither I had
  been once before; but my arrangements for this journey
  were twice frustrated; and on returning from my
  second disappointment I called upon a friend in Phi-
  ladelphia, and remarked, that it appeared to be con-
  trary to the mind of God for me to go thither: while
  thus talking, there appeared a young man standing
  before me, and although conscious that it was a super-
  natural appearance, I involuntarily exclaimed, "what
  is this?" The suggestion then took possession of my
  mind, that if I yet persisted in going thither, the Lord
  would there convert this young man by my ministry as
  a token that He had sent me. In a third atte{mpt I?}
  was more successful; and when I appeared in {the?}
  congregation, I looked for him; but saw no you g man
  whose person and apparel I could identify as the man
  whom I had seen in my vision: however, on the last
  evening of my stay there, after I had preached, the
  same young man, habited in the very apparel I had
  beheld in the vision, came forward and shook hands
  with me; testifying, that the Lord had sent me to
  awaken his soul, and separate him from his sins unto
  the Lord. He corresponded with me several years
  afterward, and gave evidence that he was standing
  fast in the faith, and progressing in the knowledge of
## 126
  God, and I was informed that he continually made
  mention of me in his prayers in the public congre-
  gations as well as in private. Having tarried some
  time with my friends in those parts, we returned back
  to New York; and having promised to accompany the
  brethren there to a camp-meeting in the neighbourhood,
  the time for holding which had not arrived, I left my
  daughter there, and proceeded on to Albany, which is
  distant about three hundred miles: the Lord graciously
  preparing the way by His providential operations. I
  preached in many chapels throughout that region;
  and the Methodists opened an extra house purposely
  for me; a very large and commodious building, but
  greatly insufficient to contain the masses who flocked
  thither to hear the word of God: the presence of the
  Lord accompanied my ministry, and rendered it the
  power of God to the salvation of many. When it
  was first announced that a female would preach in
  that chapel, a gentleman in the vicinity had a strong
  {desire?} to come and hear me, and proposed for his lady
  to accompany him; but she objected, that it was un-
  becoming in a woman to preach; and, also, that God
  never commissioned women to preach: he however,
  very much urged her, and at length he overcame her
  objections by persuasions; and they came, and the
  word was effectually sown in her heart with quickening
  power from God, her former sentiments became com-
  pletely reverted; for, as she had never before ex-
  perienced the searching and converting power of the
  word under a sermon, she was ready to imagine that
  none beside myself on earth had received the com-
  mission of God to preach the gospel; when she got
## 127
  home, she read of Christ sending the women to inform
  the disciples and Peter, that he was risen from the
  dead; she then reprobated the folly of her former
  objections; for said she, I now perceive that the first
  preachers of the resurrection were women: thus the
  Scriptures become as a new volume, when the Lord
  opens and illuminates the eyes of our mind. The
  Scriptures ever develope new and surprising truths to
  the regenerate soul; and in proportion to our measure
  of grace, and of the Spirit of God, is the illumination
  which accompanies our perusal of the Scriptures: that
  soul is not in the enjoyment of spiritual life, who reads
  the Scriptures without some perception of their un-
  paralled glories, the divine lustre of which is so pecu-
  liar that the expositions furnished by the wisdom of
  this world, and all the elucidations of human learning,
  fail of any imitation of its radiance: it is the high
  privilege of those who are begotten by the Word of
  truth to read the Scriptures, not as the word of man,
  but as they are indeed, the Word of God, a sacred
  volume, the production of the infinite God; the true
  key of this heavenly book is the Spirit of truth; under
  whose guidance and illumination we ascertain and
  enter into the mind of God; therein beholding as in a
  mirror, the glory of Jesus, we become increasingly
  assimilated to the same image, from one degree of
  glory to another, as by the Spirit of the Lord.
¶ While I was in this district, I had intelligence of my
  only surviving brother, and took a further journey of
  three hundred miles to Utica, to see him; I found him
  there, married and comfortably settled in life. I had
  not seen him since his departure from our parental
## 128
  roof; at which time I was a child of six years of age.
  It was an affectingly joyful meeting to us both; and
  my gratitude to the Lord was heightened by finding
  in him a fellow-traveller to the kingdom of heaven, and
  a member of the Baptist church in Utica. I there
  met with Mrs. Jones, a female preacher, who had come
  from England, where it appeared her ministry had been
  popular, though it was otherwise with her in America.
  Being myself a member of the parent stock, or the old
  Methodist Society, I possessed an advantage over many
  other labourers, in having access to many pulpits which
  they had not. The dear brethren in Utica freely
  opened their chapels to me; and we enjoyed many
  very blessed opportunities of edification to our souls.
  In one of their large chapels in which I preached, a
  number of young men conspired together, and came to
  hear me, with their hands filled with stones; intending,
  if I uttered any sentiments which they disapproved of,
  to pelt me therewith: my brother had driven me to the
  place in a carriage and pair; the chapel was amazingly
  crowded, the presence of the Lord overshadowed the
  assembly, and the worship suffered no interruption
  from the young gentlemen, who came, not to be
  instructed in the way of truth, but to sit in judgment
  on and try my discourse by the standard of their
  petty opinions. After service, my brother went to
  fetch the horses from some stables adjacent, these
  tyros were standing there; and he overheard their
  conversation, discovered their wicked plot and heard
  them confess that they knew not what ailed them when
  they entered the chapel; but their arms seemed bound
  and held down, and were so paralized that they dropped
## 129
  the stones upon the floor, and that their emotions were
  such during the service as they had never felt before.
  Having spent a very happy week with my brother, I
  was compelled to hasten back to New York to fulfil
  my engagement with the brethren there. On going to
  the water side to take my passage in the two o'clock
  steamer, the captain informed me that he had no room
  for another passenger; though my complexion appeared
  to be the chief reason of his refusal. I was therefore
  in a strait, for the performance of my engagement with
  the brethren in New York depended on my going that
  day; however, I learnt that there was another steamer
  about to start at seven in the evening; and on my
  application, the captain thereof agreed to take me
  with him. I therefore thanked God and took courage.
  We had a very pleasant passage, and many of the
  persons on board belonged to the household of faith;
  and what with edifying conversation, and the relation
  of each other's experience, we enjoyed a little Bethel.
  On the deck in the morning, I noticed several of the
  gentlemen engaged in very earnest conversation, and
  perceived that their discourse had reference to me; I
  therefore withdrew into the cabin, and had been there
  but a few minutes when one of them came and requested
  me to preach them a sermon on board. I replied that
  I felt no desire to preach by the will of man, and to
  gratify a human curiosity; he then assured me that
  the gentlemen who concurred in this request, were
  persons of integrity, whose aim was not novelty and
  curiosity, but edification. I then objected that the
  captain might not approve of such an attempt; he
  said he would ask permission of the captain and
## 130
  withdrew. The captain's consent being obtained, the
  crew came, and seated themselves in the cabin to the
  number of sixty. I then read a hymn, prayed, deli-
  vered a short address, concluded the service and took
  my seat. In a short time, I again perceived them in
  close conversation, and apparently talking about me,
  and I therefore withdrew; the same gentleman presently
  called me back, and said, "these gentlemen are greatly
  gratified by your discourse, and desire your acceptance
  of your passage money; upon which he presented me
  with a sum which more than covered the expense of
  my passage. I was therefore astonished at the fresh
  display of the kind providence of my indulgent God;
  for I was then much straitened in pecuniary matters,
  and was three hundred miles distant from New York;
  they then informed me that five of their number were
  ministers of the gospel, and I saw how remarkably God
  had overruled matters to prevent my passage in the
  earliest vessel, to introduce me to so many Christian
  friends, and arrange for me so convenient a supply of
  money for my necessities. I arrived in New York
  safely; and after fulfilling my engagements with the
  brethren proceeded home to Nantucket, where we
  found all things well, and the brethren rejoiced at
  and welcomed our return. We arrived at home on a
  Saturday, having been a week on our journey from
  New York, at a very critical point of time. In the
  evening after our arrival, our dear minister, Mr. Pierce,
  called to see us, and requested my assistance on the
  approaching Lord's day. I therefore resumed my former
  labours in the congregations. On Tuesday, December
  10, 1834, my daughter was safely delivered of her first-
## 131
  born son, and the blessing of the Lord very apparently
  rested upon the family. Soon after this, our Baptist
  brethren being destitute of a minister, and the coloured
  people of that denomination having a chapel on the
  island, requested me to preach statedly to them; which,
  with the consent of Mr. Pierce, I did, and the Lord
  wrought marvellously among them; the holy fire was
  greatly diffused throughout the town; many of the
  coloured people were turned to the Lord, and I had
  the pleasure of seeing them at the sea-side immersed
  into Christ, they putting on the Lord Jesus in the
  ordinance of believing baptism. Our methodist class-
  meetings also were powerfully attended with the
  presence and operations of the Holy Spirit; and indeed
  a wonderful revival of the work of the Lord ensued,
  which extended to every part of the town, and to every
  denomination of Christians. On the meeting of the
  conference, our dear minister, Mr. Pierce, was removed
  from the island, and the Rev. J. Lovejoy was stationed
  there in his stead. He manifested himself a faithful
  minister of the cross of Jesus, and I enjoyed with him
  the same intimate friendship and unity of faith, of
  purpose and effort as with Mr. Pierce. My daughter
  was some time afterwards attacked by a very serious
  illness, which continued upon her for a long time
  without any prospect of amendment; but one day, our
  minister called to see her, and prayed most fervently
  with her, and during prayer, the Lord vouchsafed a
  surprising manifestation to her soul, and from that very
  hour both she and the infant began to recover.
¶ Having laboured for some time at home with very
  great success, my mind again began to be impressed
## 132
  with the weight of more distant spheres of labour,
  and my impressions seemed directed to the States of
  New Hampshire and Vermont. About this time it hap-
  pened that I was from home a few weeks on a visit;
  and as I was sitting in the house of God, I was caught
  up in spirit, away from and far above all sublunary
  things; and appeared to be standing on a very elevated
  place in the midst of tens of thousands, who were all
  seated around, clothed in white; my own complexion
  and raiment were also white, and I was employed in
  addressing this immense concourse: it was such a
  scene as had never before entered into my conceptions;
  and presently it disappeared, and I found myself again
  in the chapel. I pondered this wonderful vision over
  in my mind, and concluded that it was given to me as
  a token that the Lord had destined me for enlarged
  and more elevated spheres of effort; and the Christian
  friends to whom I related it, also thought it a prelude
  to my future ministerial work. After this, I returned
  home, and in a few weeks afterwards, the same vision,
  but much nearer and more vivid than before, was pre-
  sented before me in the chapel, as I was sitting under
  a sermon; and after a short interval it was presented
  to me a third time in the class meeting; but more
  vividly still. I related these visions to Mr. Lovejoy's
  mother, who concurred in my interpretation of them;
  adding that she thought it was my duty to go out again
  on an itinerating ministry: some time after this, the
  sisters of our society presented me with a quantity of
  apparel, with some money, which they had secretly pre-
  pared and subscribed; bidding me to go in the name
  of the Lord, and call sinners to repentance. Thus again
## 133
  was that Scripture verified to me, "Seek ye the kingdom
  of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall
  be added unto you."
¶ I left home again in July, 1835; and was absent
  fifteen months: the Lord graciously prepared the minds
  of the people everywhere for my ministry; and many
  received the word with gladness and singleness of heart.
  I was in Boston when Mr. George Thompson was lec-
  turing there on the abominations of slavery; great
  crowds were attracted to his lectures, and much light
  was diffused by his zealous exertions in the cause of
  emancipation. From Boston I went to Lynn to attend
  the Conference. I was there introduced to Bishop
  Heading, and spent an afternoon in his company. He
  requested a sight of my testimonials and letters of re-
  commendation, which I handed him; and he expressed
  his entire satisfaction with them, but inquired if it
  should be found that my ministry was calculated to
  excite contention, many persons being strongly averse
  to the ministry of females, whether I would be willing
  to relinquish it. To which, I replied, that no ambition
  of mine, but the special appointment of God, had put
  me into the ministry; and, therefore, I had no option
  in the matter; and as to such Christians as take up
  ignorant and prejudiced objections against my labours;
  men whose whims are law, who walk after the imagina-
  tion of their own hearts, and to whom the cause of
  God is a toy; I could not for a moment study their gra-
  tification at the sacrifice of duty. It is an easy matter
  to adopt a string of notions on religion, and make a
  great ado about them; but the weight of religious
  obligation, and the principle of conscientious obedience
## 134
  to God are quite another matter. I enjoyed the good
  bishop's company, and heard him with pleasure avow
  that he should be sorry in any way to discourage
  me.
¶ From Lynn I itinerated from city to city, and from
  village to village, preaching the gospel of the kingdom
  in the fear of the Lord; and great was the number of
  those who believed and were baptised.
¶ On my visit to Flushing, I preached from Isaiah
  xxxviii. 1, "Set thine house in order; for thou shalt
  die and not live." Under that sermon many persons
  were awakened, and among the number was one poor
  woman who cried to the Lord for mercy, and applied
  for admission into the church; but her application was
  rejected, because she was then cohabiting with a man
  by whom she had borne five children, yet had neglected
  to comply with the matrimonial form required by the
  law of the state. Whether her position was that of
  mere concubinage or marriage de facto; and whether
  the brethren were in their decision equally justified by
  Scripture as by the law of the state and the sense of
  society, are points which may admit of much discussion:
  the marriage customs and laws set forth by God in the
  Scriptures, are so widely opposite from those of civilized
  nations in modern times, that when such cases arise,
  and the sacred and secular authorities clash upon them,
  it is not easy to determine what course ought to be
  pursued by a Christian communion. Happily, however,
  these parties immediately complied with the requirement
  of the American marriage law, the usage of society, and
  the dictum of the church; upon which they were
  admitted into the Methodist connexion, lived happily
## 135
  in the Lord, and became respected as good members of
  society.
¶ On leaving Flushing, I took a long and circuitous
  route, and after an absence of fifteen months, returned
  home with great peace of mind.
¶ I remained at home this time for the space of three
  {years, with?} the exception of an occasional short journey,
  and visit of a few weeks; and throughout this period,
  my mind was often burdened with the weight of a
  voyage to England. I often argued the matter before
  the Lord in prayer, pleading my ignorance, my sex,
  my colour and my inability to minister the gospel in a
  country so polished and enlightened, so furnished with
  Bibles, so blessed with ministers, so studded with
  temples; but the Lord said, "say not, I cannot speak;
  for thou shalt go to all to whom I send thee, and what I
  command thee, thou shalt speak."
¶ In 1837, when on a visit to some religious friends,
  one morning, I saw a remarkable vision; I appeared to
  be in a strange place, and conversing with a stranger,
  when three enormous balls of fire came perpendicularly
  over my head, and each of them exploded and burst
  at the same moment: I instantly appeared to fall to the
  ground; but was caught up by an unseen hand, and
  placed upon an animal, which darted with me through
  the regions of the air, with the velocity of lightning,
  and deposited me inside the window of an upper
  chamber. I there heard the voice of the Almighty,
  saying, "I have a message for her to go with upon the
  high seas, and she will go." This occurrence took
  place just three years prior to my departure from
  America.
¶ In 1839, the Lord was pleased to send me again
## 136
  into the Southern states; and as I travelled from city
  to city, I felt the impression that the time was near
  when I must leave the land of my nativity for a foreign
  shore. In the town of Providence, Rhode Island, I
  preached on a Thursday evening in a large Room, for Mr.
  Bedell. On the following Lord's-day, I attended the
  Wesleyan Chapel, where I heard Mr. Bedell {in?} the
  morning, and, by his invitation, occupied his pulpit in
  the afternoon, on which occasion the chapel proved
  much too small for the crowds which assembled: after
  the service, some leading gentlemen from another
  denomination came to Mr. Bedell, and offered him the
  use of their chapel, which was much larger than his, for
  the evening service. It was thankfully accepted, and I
  preached there in the evening, to an immense audience.
  Mr. Bedell and his lady were both of them natives of
  England; at that time he was stationed in the Pro-
  vidence circuit. I had not been in their company a
  quarter of an hour when both of them avowed their
  concurrent impression, that I was destined by the Lord
  to minister the gospel in a foreign land: such an obser-
  vation appeared to me very remarkable. From Pro-
  vidence I visited New York, Philadelphia and Baltimore;
  and wherever I went, the inquiry was continually
  made, if I was not about shortly to embark for England,
  accompanied by observations that my ministry was
  ultimately destined for a different arena than was fur-
  nished by America. I went on to the city of Washington,
  and our meetings there were greatly distinguished by
  the presence and operations of the Holy Spirit. Lady
  Hunter, of whom mention is made in my former visit to
  that city thirteen years before, presented me with a
  contribution in aid of this purpose; and I could not but
## 137
  remark, how the Lord everywhere moved the minds of
  my friends to make it a topic of conversation; thereby
  keeping it always before me, and increasing the stimulus
  of my mind towards it; and without any solicitation of
  mine, they presented me their cheerful contributions;
  yea, both white and coloured brethren, voluntarily came
  forward with their free-will offerings, to enable me to
  undertake the voyage, and bade me go and preach to
  strangers in a strange land, in the name of the Lord.
  Many were the proofs besides those related in this work,
  that the Lord gave me, of His purpose that I should
  come to England; and being now many hundreds of
  miles distant from my daughter, and feeling that the
  Lord's time had arrived, I wrote to apprise her thereof,
  and shortly after returned homewards as far as New
  York, where I attended the anniversary of the abolition
  society: many of the speakers on that occasion came
  over to England to attend the great anti-slavery meet-
  ing in Exeter Hall. I then returned home; and was very
  affectionately received by my dear daughter; and made
  all possible dispatch in preparations for my departure.
¶ The parting moment was painful in the extreme;
  for my daughter, and her two dear little boys, were
  entwined in the strongest affections of my heart;
  but I durst not disobey Him who had said unto me,
  as he had said unto Abraham, "Get thee out from
  thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy
  father's house, unto a land that I will show thee." On
  the 10th of June 1840, I rose from the bed on which I
  had laid for the last time; the recollection of that bitter
  morning even now suffuses my eyes with tears, and
  interrupts the delineations of my pen: the morning was
## 138
  calm, our minds resigned and peaceful, and we took,
  and held each others hand, in silence; which was at
  length broken by my daughter, who said, "Mother,
  we part now, but I think we shall yet meet again; the
  will of the Lord be done, and God be with thee." At
  nine o'clock, A. M., I bade farewell to those dear ties,
  and started for New York, where I tarried until the
  1st July; and then I took the steam-boat to go to
  the ship Philadelphia, Captain Morgan, which vessel
  was lying in quarantine. Soon after our arrival on
  board, she got under weigh, and set sail for the port
  of London. My feelings on leaving the land of my
  nativity, and all that was dear to me on earth, were
  acutely indescribable; but God commanded, and I
  obeyed; bidding farewell to my country, and, com-
  mitting my dear friends to the grace of God. The wind
  was fair, the passengers agreeable, and we were soon
  carried beyond the view of land. On the following
  morning, I awoke and presented my thanksgivings to
  my heavenly Father for His preserving care of me
  throughout the night. I then went upon deck, and
  surveyed the broad canopy above, and the rolling ocean
  beneath, gently moving wave after wave, as we glided
  over its tremulous surface. I observed the birds of the
  air flying over our heads, and wondered, at such a
  distance from land, that they were able to take such
  excursions without resting. I beheld the finny tribes
  pouring forth by thousands. I was now floating on the
  great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innu-
  merable, both small and great beasts. There go the
  ships! there is that great leviathan whom thou hast
  made to play therein. These wait all upon thee, that
## 139
  thou mayest give them their meat in due season. Oh
  Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast
  thou made them all! the earth is full of thy riches.
  Psalm civ. 24, 27.
¶ On the 23rd day of July, we were cheered with the
  sight of land; and on the 24th, we came to anchor off
  Falmouth, where most of the cabin passengers left us.
  On the evening of the 25th, we came safely into the
  London Docks: this was on a Saturday; and on the
  morning of the Lord's-day, I first set my foot on British
  ground. As I proceeded along Ratcliff Highway, I
  was much surprised to see the shops open, and many
  kinds of business in the course of transaction, women
  crying fruits for sale, and the people intent on traffic
  and marketing. I was indeed astonished, that in the
  metropolis of the most Christian country in the world,
  such a want of respect should be indicated towards the
  day which Jesus signalised by His resurrection, and His
  apostles practically set apart for the commemoration of
  His eucharistic sacrament, and the ordinances of His
  religion. Whether the literal and exact requirements
  of the fourth commandment be, in the case of Christ-
  ians, transferred from the Jewish Sabbath to the "Lord's-
  day," is a point upon which all the disciples of Christ are
  not agreed; but if Christians are not bound to observe
  an absolute quietude and rest thereon, they certainly are
  bound to pay it that respect which is due to the day on
  which our redemption was assured by the Lord's resur-
  rection—a day which was made sacred by the practice
  of His apostles, and by their inspired authority, called
  the "Lord's-day." Having taken apartments in Well-
  close-square, in the evening I attended at the Countess
## 140
  of Huntingdon's chapel, in Pell-street, and heard a
  discourse which afforded some encouragement to the
  heart of a female stranger in a foreign land. Some
  days elapsed ere I met with any of the Methodist family;
  but, going on the Wednesday evening again to Pell-
  street chapel, as I was passing a window, I caught
  sight of a lady, whose appearance powerfully arrested
  my attention; and it appeared that the feeling of sur-
  prise and interest was mutual. I turned back, and
  spoke to her, and inquired if she was acquainted with
  any section of the Methodist body? She said that her
  daughter should on the following evening conduct me
  to the Wesleyan chapel of St. George, which she did
  accordingly; and I found that several class meetings
  were held on that evening; on that occasion, I met
  with Mr. A——who introduced me to Mr. C——one of
  the local preachers; and I was admitted into the class
  led by him, and enjoyed a very sweet time of refreshing
  from the presence of the Lord. I became acquainted
  also with Mrs. T.——a true sister in the Lord, who has
  since fallen asleep in Jesus: and was introduced to a
  gentleman who interested himself greatly on my behalf
  very considerably enlarged the circle of my acquain-
  tance, and even ushered me before the committees of
  the peace and anti-slavery societies. I found my situa-
  tion rather awkward in reference to the latter body. I
  was first received by a deputation of three gentlemen,
  and afterwards admitted before the board. It was
  really an august assembly; their dignity appeared so
  redundant, that they scarcely knew what to do with
  it all. Had I attended there on a matter of life and
  death, I think I could scarcely have been more closely
## 141
  interrogated or more rigidly examined; from the recep-
  tion I met with, my impression was, that they imagined
  I wanted some pecuniary or other help from them; for
  they treated me as the proud do the needy. In this,
  however, they were mistaken. Among many other
  questions, they demanded to be informed, whether I had
  any new doctrine to advance, that the English Christians
  are not in possession of? To which I replied, no; but I
  was sent to preach Christ, and Him crucified: unto the
  Jews a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness:
  they also wished to be informed, how it came about that
  God should send me? to which I replied, that I could not
  tell; but I knew that God required me to come hither,
  and that I came in obedience to His sovereign will; but
  that the Almighty's design therein was best known to
  Himself; but behold! said I, "I am here." Pride and
  arrogancy are among the master sins of rational beings;
  an high look, a stately bearing, and a proud heart, are
  abominations in the sight of God, and insure a woeful
  reverse in a future life. Infidels will indulge in pom-
  posity and arrogance; but Christians are and must be
  humble and lowly. As a servant of Jesus, I am required
  to bear testimony in his name, who was meek and lowly,
  against the lofty looks of man, and the assumptions of
  such lordly authority and self-importance. Ere this work
  meets the eye of the public, I shall have sojourned in
  England five years: and I am justified in saying, that
  my God hath made my ministry a blessing to hundreds
  of persons; and many who were living in sin and darkness
  before they saw my coloured face, have risen up to
  praise the Lord, for having sent me to preach His Gospel
  on the shores of Britain; numbers who had been reared
## 142
  to maturity, and were resident in localities plentifully
  furnished with places of worship and ministers of the
  gospel, and had scarcely heard a sermon in their lives,
  were attracted to hear the coloured female preacher,
  were inclosed in the gospel net, and are now walking in
  the commandments and ordinances of the Lord. I have
  travelled in several parts of England, and I thank God
  He has given me some spiritual children in every place
  wherein I have laboured.
¶ Soon after my arrival, I met with a gentleman, who
  advised my immediate return to my own conntry; add-
  ing that if he had been in America before my departure
  and had known my intention, he would have advised
  me better: I replied, that I had no will of my own in
  the matter; but my heavenly Father commanded, and
  I durst not confer with flesh and blood, but obeyed and
  came: but like other men destitute of faith in God, he
  did not comprehend this kind of argument; and per-
  sisted in his worldly reasonings, saying that people did
  not give away their gold here, and I had much better
  return. It is to be deplored that there are so many
  Christians of this person's cast: who are of the world;
  speak in accordance with its principles and sentiments,
  and walk according to its course. Instead of having
  little faith, they discover none at all: ignorant of the
  Scriptures and of the power of God, the love of the
  Father is not in them. Having parted with this Lao-
  dicean gentleman, I called upon Mrs. H., in Princes-
  square: and my mind being somewhat damped, I sat
  a few minutes in silence, which Mrs. H. broke by
  an affectionate inquiry into my circumstances; at the
  same time, presenting me with a handsome donation;
## 143
  telling me not to be discouraged, for the Lord, would
  open my way and sustain me: my mind was cheered and
  my faith strengthened by this opportune proof of the
  power of God to furnish succours and raise up friends
  for His people even in a land of strangers.
¶ In a few days after, Mrs. T. introduced me to some
  of the Bible Christians, or Bryanites, as they are called;
  who are, I believe, a secession from the Weslayan Metho-
  dists: our reception from them was very cool; but one
  of the brethren was about to preach in the street; and
  he invited me to preach in his stead. Accordingly at
  the time appointed, we repaired to the street and com-
  menced the meeting; a very great crowd assembled,
  and I preached to them; but the meeting was broken
  up by two policemen, who came and tapped me on
  the shoulder, and desired me to desist; they demanded
  what authority I had for preaching? a gentleman pre-
  sent said, "she has her authority in her hand," that is,
  "the Word of God:" we then departed.
¶ On the following Lord's-day morning, I attended
  with Mrs. T., at Salem chapel; and, in the afternoon,
  I preached in Stepney-fields, to a very numerous audi-
  tory. A very heavy thunder shower fell during the
  service, yet very few persons retired in consequence of
  it. When the service was terminated, a gentleman and
  lady came, and inquired of me where I resided? and
  desired me to call and visit them; which, in the course
  of a few days, I did, and was very affectionately re-
  ceived: the lady, Mrs. T. then invited me to spend
  a day with them, to which I consented, and enjoyed
  a heavenly day in their company. She then engaged
  me to spend a week with them; I did so, and a delight-
## 144
  ful week it was. The house was a little Bethel to us,
  and in the stated morning aud evening worship of the
  family, the Lord manifested Himself in very rich displays
  of grace. Before my week expired, Mrs. T. sent to my
  apartments for my trunk, and bade me account her
  house my home during my sojourn in England. Their
  second daughter, who has since fallen asleep in Jesus,
  a most interesting and excellent young lady, was then
  greatly afflicted with a disease of the heart: our com-
  munion in the Spirit was exceedingly choice and pre-
  cious; I richly enjoyed and highly prized her society.
¶ I visited a number of small chapels in this vast metro-
  polis, and endeavoured to advance my heavenly Father's
  cause by attending many religious tea meetings; some
  of which I found very edifying and profitable to the
  soul. I also partook of a breakfast with a number of
  ministers and friends at Mr. B. T——rs., by his special
  invitation; and after this, I was sent for to Ramsgate,
  and travelled through the county of Kent, preaching
  the word in many of the towns and villages as I passed
  through them. When in Canterbury, my mind was
  much struck with the mutations of time upon the works
  of man. I beheld there some stately edifices which
  were venerable with age; I ascended the eminence of the
  Dane John, from which I had a full view of the town;
  the spot where some of the martyrs of Jesus sealed the
  truth with their blood, was pointed out to me; and as I
  gazed upon the memorable place, I thought of those faith-
  ful servants of God with much sympathy and yearning
  of heart.
¶ Having received an invitation from some of the Primi-
  tive Methodists in Yorkshire, to go down and labour
## 145
  among them, I went thither by railway, and reached
  Pontefract about eight o'clock on the evening of the
  30th of December, 1840; the distance was great, being
  about 170 miles; and I was very much fatigued with the
  journey. The hireling will make the best bargain he can;
  but they who bear the commissions of Jesus will find no
  sinecures involved in them, but frequently hard labour
  and harder fare. On my arrival, I was very kindly
  received by Mrs. Clift; and after a good night's repose,
  I was on the next morning much invigorated. On the
  following day, December 31, Mr. Colson the superinten-
  dent minister, and Mr. Crompton his assistant, called to
  see me, and explained the objects they had in view in
  sending for me. In the evening we attended a tea meet-
  ing of the Sunday School; on which occasion the chil-
  dren sang some beautiful anthems, and repeated some
  pieces with much correctness; the meeting was after-
  wards addressed by some of the brethren, and also by
  myself. At the conclusion of the meeting, we observed
  a watch night, as is customary with the Methodist
  societies, which was attended with much of the presence
  of God, the gracious manifestation of His Spirit, and with
  spiritual benefit to the souls of many. The weather was
  very inclement and rigorous; and an abundance of
  labour was presented before me, which I entered into
  with much delight and vigour, though with considerable
  weariness and distress to the body.
V "My shrinking flesh complains,
V And murmurs to contend so long;
V My mind superior is to pains:
V When I am weak, then am I strong."
## 146
¶ On the 3rd of January, 1841, I went to Brotherton,
  and preached in the chapel belonging to the brethren;
  it was completely crowded, and the Lord was in the
  midst of us to bless His people with the manifestations
  of His grace and love. After service, I returned the
  same evening to Pontefract, very much exhausted with
  fatigue. On the following day Mr. T— came to con-
  duct me to Thorp, where I preach in the evening, from
  "Enter ye at the strait gate," Matt. vii. 13, with con-
  siderable energy of spirit; but, thoughout my labours in
  England, I have found a far less favourable soil for the seed
  of the kingdom in the British mind than in the American.
  Human nature must be in every country radically the
  same; God is the same; yet the word preached is
  generally attended in America with far more power-
  ful and converting results than in Britain. The popula-
  tion of the United States have not been so extensively
  vitiated by the infidelity and sedition of the press; and
  being more thinly spread over an immense territorial
  space, there is less of contamination than in the more
  condensed masses of English society; and they perhaps
  possess more honest simplicity of character, and less of
  the self-sufficiency of a licentious intellectuality and
  worldly wisdom. It is not for me, however, to account
  for the cause; the fact is but too apparent. I had many
  seals to my ministry in Yorkshire, notwithstanding the
  general barrenness of the mental soil; and found, in
  many of its towns, and especially in Leeds, a very lov-
  ing, lively and benevolent Christian people; not only
  in the Methodist, but in other denominations also; and
  amongst the society of Friends. I attended one of
  the meetings of the Friends there, and whilst sitting
## 147
  among them, was moved by the Spirit to address them,
  and the dear friends received the message which came
  through the medium of their coloured sister with patience
  and delight.
¶ I went to Leeds on the 4th of February; a place ren-
  dered memorable to the Methodist societies by the
  labours of Mrs. Fletcher, whose ministry the Lord so
  signally blest with the communications of His Spirit:
  the first place I preached at in Leeds was a chapel in
  Leylands, which had been in the occupation of the late
  Anne Carr, who had recently departed this life in the faith
  of Jesus; the place was then in the occupation of her
  companion in labours, Miss Martha Williams, and the
  Lord graciously gave me some seals to my ministry in
  that chapel. From thence, I went, on the 7th, to Mr.
  R—ds, and laboured with the Primitive Methodists on
  Quarry Hill. I attended several missionary meetings
  in their connexion, which were held in various circuits;
  taking up my abode chiefly at Miss P—e, and Mr. A—s;
  under the hospitable roof of the latter friend, I spent
  many weeks, in peace and happiness, blessed with abund-
  ance of blessings spiritual and temporal. I also preached
  in Stanningley, for the primitive brethren; and for the
  Wesleyans, in their chapel; on which occasion, a very
  remarkable solemnity pervaded the assembly; and the
  Lord was pleased to direct my utterance, and give it
  such a pointedness, as made it apparent that it was a
  message from Himself. While I abode in that town,
  I lodged at Mr. G. W—s, with whose lady I went, by
  invitation, to breakfast with the minister, Mr. H. who
  was stationed there; we enjoyed a sweet and refresh-
  ing season in the family devotions of the morning; and
## 148
  I felt a strong attachment in the Spirit to Mrs. H—,
  who, though young in life, was blessed with the posses-
  sion of deep piety or devotion; and a very sweet unction
  of the Holy Ghost abode on her spirit. From Stan-
  ningly I departed to Pontefract; and, in a few days
  afterwards, received a letter from a brother at the
  former place, informing me that one of the brethren
  there had died suddenly, on the day of my departure;
  but they sorrowed, at the loss of a dear brother on
  whose behalf they possessed a well grounded hope.
  Among others of the towns I visited in Yorkshire, was
  Bradford. I also preached an anniversary sermon at
  Shelf; being, while I sojourned there, the guest of Mr.
  B—y. On my return to Leeds, I met with a gentle-
  man from Hull, who came to conduct me to that place.
  I accordingly went thither; and abode a few days,
  preaching in different parts of the town. On one even-
  ing there were ten persons who professed to find peace
  with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. On another
  occasion a female who had left her first love, and lost the
  vitality as well as the name of spiritual life, was reco-
  vered from her lapsed condition and obtained peace to
  her soul. On my departure I engaged to come to them
  again, and preach to them on the opening of their new
  chapel; and this poor woman had desired to open her
  mind to me, and relate what great things God had
  done for her by my ministry; but ere that day came,
  her spirit had taken flight from this region of sin and
  grief; but she left a message for me on her death-bed,
  to assure me that she died in the faith of Christ, con-
  fiding in the God of her salvation.
¶ From Hull I returned to Leeds; and, during my tem-
## 149
  porary abode there, the church sustained a loss in the
  sudden death of our dear brother, William Dawson,
  who had been a zealous champion in the work of the
  Lord. Several thousands of persons were congregated
  together on the day of his interment, to witness the
  procession, and manifest their respect to the memory of
  our departed brother. The corpse was brought out
  into the open air, and one of the ministers offered
  prayer to God; after which, Mr. Garland delivered an
  address, the local preachers and leaders then formed in
  order of procession, six abreast in the front of the hearse,
  and the cavalcade solemnly proceeded to the place of
  interment, which was several miles distant from Leeds;
  the whole distance being thronged by multitudes who
  anxiously witnessed the scene. From Leeds I took a
  tour of that part of the country, travelling from town to
  town, and village to village, preaching the gospel of the
  kingdom, and testifying to thousands of persons, repent-
  ance towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
  At the appointed time, I fulfilled my engagement at
  Hull, leaving on the 3rd of July; and on the day follow-
  ing, I preached at Brewery Fields, and had the pleasure
  to witness the conversion of four souls from darkness to
  light: at Keithly, I met with a gentleman and his wife,
  who were from Liverpool on a visit, and who gave me
  a very pressing invitation to come over to Liverpool and
  see them, which I promised to do. I preached on an
  anniversary occasion at Leylands, when seven souls
  entered into the liberty of the gospel. On the 23rd, I
  went to Wirksworth, accompanied by sister W—ms,
  and we were kindly received by Mr. S. E. and the
  friends there; I preached on the afternoon and evening
## 150
  of the day following in the chapel; when four persons
  received very manifest spiritual benefit. I also preached
  in the Wesleyan chapel in that town, and much enjoyed
  the interviews with its minister with which I was
  privileged.
¶ Having written to the family in Liverpool who had so
  pressingly invited me to visit them, to apprise them of my
  coming, on the 2nd of August, I took leave of sister W.
  and the kind friends at Wirksworth, and travelled thi-
  ther by way of Manchester, and arrived in Liverpool about
  six o'clock in the evening. On going to the residence
  of the parties who had invited me, I found that the lady
  and her daughter were absent from home; and the gen-
  tleman's memory was so reluctant, that he very distantly
  recognised me. I was greatly fatigued with my journey,
  and somewhat disappointed after such a journey, to find
  my reception so different from the invitation. I soon
  took my leave of one whom I found not at all careful to
  entertain strangers, or practice the Christian duty of
  hospitality, and went in search of lodgings, which I
  had great difficulty in procuring: but after wandering
  from place to place, and making many fruitless applica-
  tions, I at length succeeded. It was of the Lord's good-
  ness that I was at that inauspicious time possessed of
  sufficient money for my exigencies. My visit to this
  town was replete with discouragements. I attended
  several meetings of the association, who were holding
  their annual conference there at that time. I also
  made inquiries for the Wesleyans, and attended at
  Brunswick Chapel; and afterwards called upon the Rev.
  Mr. H., who received me with kindness, and referred
  me to Mr. D. the Wesleyan superintendent minister at
## 151
  that station. On my visit to Mr. D., he left directly
  on my introduction, to attend a funeral; but Mrs. D.
  entered into conversation with me, and assuming the
  theologian, reprobated female preaching as unscriptural;
  adding, that Mr. D. was greatly opposed to it, and
  always put it down if possible: she further said, that
  Paul ordained that a woman should not be suffered to
  speak in the church; but to sit in silence, and ask in-
  formation of her husband at home. I was, however,
  too blind to discern, that for a female to warn sinners
  to flee from the wrath to come; to preach Christ to
  them, invite them to come to Him, and exhort them to
  be saved, was equally disorderly and improper with the
  interruptions of a church in its meetings and services,
  by the inquisitive questions of the females present;
  nor could I possibly understand how my ministry,
  which is directed to bring sinners to repentance, and
  employed in humble and affectionate attempts to
  stir up the pure minds of the saints, by way of re-
  membrance and exhortation, involved any dictation or
  assumption of authority over the male sex. The apostle
  directed that a woman, when praying or prophecying,
  should have her head covered; from which it may be
  inferred, that the praying and prophecying of a woman
  is allowable; but Mrs. D. was differently minded, and
  throught that a preaching female ought to depart from
  the Methodist body, and unite with the Quakers; but
  the Lord, who raised up Deborah to be a prophetess,
  and to judge His people, and inspired Hulda to deliver
  the counsels of God, sent me forth not as a Quakeress
  but as a Methodist, and chiefly employed me to labour
  amongst the Methodists. I mentioned to her, some of
## 152
  the methods, by which the Lord made known to me
  His will, that I should go and preach the gospel; and
  these she met, by supposing, that it was possible I
  might have been misled. By this time, Mr. D. re-
  turned, and his Christian charity seemed put to some
  little expense on finding that I had not decamped; I
  presented him my testimonials and certificates; as he
  returned them, he said, "But do you not know that we
  do not allow women to preach; and that there is nothing
  in the Scriptures that will allow of it at all? Addressing
  me with much assumed authority and severity. "We
  do not allow," sounded very uncouthly in my ears in a
  matter in which the commission of the Almighty is
  assumed. I again related some of the manifestations
  made to me by the Holy Ghost in reference to this
  matter; to which he replied, that he could not see how
  God could, consistently with Himself, give me such direc-
  tions. Doubtless he said the truth; for the line of worldly
  wisdom, self-sufficient reason and opinionated faith, can
  never gauge the operations of the Spirit of God; and
  always either rejects them at once, or meets them with,
  "How can these things be?" He then complimented me
  by adducing some instances, in which female preachers
  had misconducted themselves; and wound up his
  vituperations by saying, that the success of my labours
  in the ministry proved nothing in my favour; for that
  God would ever bless His word by whomsoever preached.
  Perhaps, had I taken upon myself to have investigated
  this gentleman's call to the ministry, I might have
  written Tekel upon it, for his spiritual condition falls far
  short of the standard I have received: but Paul says,
  "Who art thou that judgeth another man's servant; to
## 153
  his own master he standeth or falleth," and, "Why
  dost thou judge thy brother." I then departed from
  this iron-hearted abode, somewhat distressed and
  wounded in spirit and at a loss what step I should take
  next.
¶ But thanks be unto God; He knoweth how to deliver
  the godly out of temptations, and will not suffer us to
  be tempted above what we are able to bear. On the
  following morning I awoke, with these words passing
  though my mind,
V "Angels are now hovering round us;
V Unperceived, they mix the throng;
V Wondering at the love which crowned us;
V Glad to join the holy song.
V Hallelujah!
V Love and praise to Christ belong."
¶ I then felt the assurance of the Holy Spirit that the
  dark cloud which had so thickly and heavily pressed
  upon me was breaking; and a way soon after opened
  for me to visit Manchester, which in a few days after I
  did; and took lodgings on Chetham-hill, of Mrs. H——
  who conducted me to Mr. R——'s, a local preacher,
  at whose house I was invited to spend the day: in the
  evening the class met there, and I assisted to lead it;
  the people were in a healthy, spiritual condition; and
  we enjoyed a sweet fellowship of the Spirit and com-
  munion with each other. On the 28th, I preached in
  Stanly Street; and on the 31st, in the association chapel
  in Stork Street, to a numerous audience. In a few
  days afterwards, I was sent for to visit a lady who was
  in great distress of mind. On entering the apartment
  where she was sitting, I shall never forget the expres-
  sion of despair which sat on her countenance: she
## 154
  informed me that on the previous Lord's day, she came
  in the afternoon from motives of curiosity to hear me,
  and that the discourse had cut her to the heart, and
  portrayed her character as one self-destroyed by suici-
  dal sin: the Bible was lying by her side; I took it up,
  opened at, and read from Isaiah lxi. 1—3, "The
  Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord
  hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the
  meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted,
  to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of
  the prison unto them that are bound: to proclaim the
  acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance
  of our God; to comfort all that mourn; to appoint
  unto them that mourn in Zion; to give unto them
  beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the gar-
  ments of praise for the spirit of heaviness, &c." She
  then broke out in rapturous exclamations, praising God
  for sending me as a messenger of salvation to her;
  declaring herself filled with joy, and wondering at the
  change which had taken place within her soul; she
  confessed her unworthiness to receive such unexampled
  mercy and grace; having gone to hear me as she ac-
  knowledged, without any thought of good, but of mere
  curiosity; and she glorified God in me. This dear
  lady was one of many of the earliest seals to my
  ministry in Manchester. On one occasion, I accom-
  panied my friend, Mrs. H——, to visit a family of her
  acquaintance; they made no pretensions whatever to
  religion; but our visit proved a blessing indeed to them:
  several of their neighbours were present; and among
  them, a private in the police force and his wife; and, as
  I inquired of their prospect, relative to a future state of
## 155
  existence, his wife informed me that he had been a
  religious man, but had fallen from grace; and with
  much earnestness intreated me to discourse with him in
  particular. I did so; and the Lord gave me a message
  to him, which went to his heart; he burst into tears;
  lamented that his calling was of such a description,
  that the class of persons to whom he belonged were
  regarded as the offscouring of the human race, and that
  few cared for their souls; adding, that the hardships of
  their situation were peculiarly distressing; and expressed
  great gratitude to God and acknowledgments to me
  for the sympathy I had evinced for him. We then
  bowed down before the Lord in fervent prayer, and all
  present were greatly moved, and deeply affected. A
  great door and effectual was opened to me of the Lord,
  in Manchester; and many there became the crown of
  my rejoicing in Christ Jesus. I again became fully
  occupied in the service of my heavenly Master, going
  from chapel to chapel, and from town to town.
¶ I preached one day at the house of Mr. W——,
  under the bank, from Luke xiii. 7. "Cut it down;
  why cumbereth it the ground." Many persons were
  deeply affected under that sermon; and among them,
  one poor man who came in a few days afterwards
  to Mrs. W——, and asked permission to meet in the
  class, stating that he had been wholly deprived of sleep
  ever since he heard that sermon. On the class-night, I
  preached a short discourse, which was followed by a
  prayer-meeting, and this man and four others experi-
  enced the pardoning love of God.
¶ On the 15th of September I went by appointment to
  preach at the house of Mr. L. under the Bank; and just
## 156
  before the meeting commenced, the powers of darkness
  suddenly assailed my spirit, and so burdened and ob-
  scured me, that in a short time I had no light or spirit
  within me; and I commenced the service with a weight
  upon my mind as if all the people were hanging upon
  me. A hungry people exhausts a spiritual ministry, a
  carnal people paralyses it, an unbelieving people drags
  it down, a rebellious and resisting people grieves it, an
  erroneous people inflames it—the cause of my darkness,
  however, was not in the people; nor was I able to ascer-
  tain the reason, which has hitherto been hidden from
  me. In my first prayer the cloud was dispelled, and I
  proceeded with my work in the light of the Lord; but
  as I returned home to my lodging, the darkness returned
  upon my soul. In the morning the Lord smiled upon
  my soul again; and I arose with a light and cheerful
  heart, rejoicing in God with joy unspeakable and full of
  glory.
¶ On the 23rd of October, I preached in the afternoon
  and evening to numerous audiences at Hayfield, with
  much freedom; and the people were very attentive and
  much edified.
¶ On the 27th, Mr. Ellery, the superintendent of the
  Tonnon Street circuit, with his wife, called and took me
  home with them; I preached for him in the evening;
  and seven persons were under that sermon brought into
  the liberty of the children of God. On the 1st of
  November, I attended a Wesleyan Missionary meeting
  at Chetham; and enjoyed it as a time of refreshing
  from the Lord. On the 7th, I preached morning and
  afternoon at Tonnon Street Chapel; and preached a
  charity sermon in the evening, in Berry Street Chapel
## 157
  Salford. While in Manchester, I took an opportunity
  of going with several of the brethren and sisters to visit
  the deaf, dumb, and blind school, where we witnessed
  the substitutes for tongues, ears and eyes in successful
  operation. Truly marvellous is the immense variety of
  resources, which the bountiful God of nature has placed
  within the reach of, and at the service of man.
¶ On the 27th, I went to Glossop to preach three anni-
  versary sermons; on my arrival in the town, Mr. H.
  came to the coach to meet me, conducted me to his
  house, and very kindly entertained me: the anniversary
  was a delightful day; and numbers found it good to
  be in attendance. I preached again on the following
  evening, and the place was excessively crowded: on the
  day after, I returned to Manchester. On the 5th of
  December I went to Stockport to preach some charity
  sermons; and the croud was so great, that it was with
  great difficulty I reached the pulpit; many hundreds of
  persons were forced to retire who could not gain admit-
  tance. I preached again on the 8th, and spent a very
  happy week there in visiting the brethren and sisters,
  and returned again to Manchester. On the 10th, I
  went to Hollingsworth; on the Lord's day morning I
  led the class, and preached in the afternoon and even-
  ing in the chapel. On the Monday a great many of
  the friends brought their provisions together and spent
  the afternoon in singing, prayer and spiritual conversa-
  tion: in the evening they all repaired to the chapel,
  and I preached again to a great congregation. Two
  gentlemen were present who were utter strangers to all
  the friends; and, as they placed themselves just before
  me, laughing and tapping each other, their design was
## 158
  apparently not the edification of their souls. I preached
  on that evening from Proverbs iii. 5, 6, and, under the
  sermons, their laughter was checked, and they hung
  down their heads and strove to conceal their dejection.
  After service the congregation was detained some time
  by a very heavy shower of rain; and I sang one of the
  American hymns; many shed a profusion of tears:
  and these gentlemen seemed rivetted to the spot, and
  were the last to retire from the chapel. On the next
  day, I was about to return to Manchester; and on my
  way to the coach office, I called at Mr. H—'s, to bid
  him and his family farewell, when Mrs. H. exclaimed,
  "Oh! are you going? I am very much disappointed;
  for I wished you and some other friends to spend the
  afternoon with us, and I have been making preparations
  for it; and I was in hopes it would do me good: for I
  feel that I am a poor and a lost sinner; I am very
  much burdened; her tears and sobs suppressed her
  further utterance; and I needed no further persuasive
  to stay that day at their house; and on that evening,
  she obtained peace with God through faith in our Lord
  Jesus Christ; and on the next Lord's day, she
  came forth and gave evidence of having become a new
  creature in Christ Jesus. On the 11th, I returned to
  Manchester, and removed my lodgings to St James'
  street; in the evening, I attended a tea meeting in
  Beetle-street, at which Mr. F presided. On the 25th
  I went to Stalybridge, where I received a message from
  the friends at Hollingsworth, desiring me to attend a
  tea meeting there that evening. I accordingly went
  thither, and found Mrs. H. still rejoicing in the love of
  God; we had a very comfortable tea meeting. On
## 159
  the Lord's day I preached in the afternoon and evening
  at Staleybridge; and also on the Monday evening.
  On the 31th. Mrs. F—d. of Salford, the lady of the
  superintendent sent for me to come and spend the day
  with them; which I did, and it being the last of the
  year, at nine o'clock in the evening we went to the chapel
  to commence the watch meeting: several of us were
  speakers on the occasion, and it was a season of much
  solemnity and godly comfort. Thus we witnessed the
  expiration of the year, with thanksgivings for the divine
  kindness which had been vouchsafed to us therein; and
  hailed the new year with prayer for and earnests of
  sustaining grace and prospective mercies. I tarried in
  Manchester about nine months; visiting and preachin
  in very many towns and villages in its vicinity and within
  ten or twenty miles around it: the Lord being with me
  to direct and sustain my willing exertions in His holy
  cause. I preached about two hundred times during my
  continuance here; and ultimately by His direction, took
  my leave of the dear friends to see them no more in the
  flesh, till the trumpet of God shall sound the muster of
  the blood-bought congregation to the throne of Jesus.
¶ On the 13th of June, 1843, I travelled by railway to
  Huddersfield; met with a very kind reception from
  Mr. S. Routledge; and, in the afternoon, Mrs. R.
  accompanied me on a visit to Mr. Keys, a class leader
  in the Wesleyan connexion. I attended, and led his
  class in the evening, and enjoyed a happy season with
  the people. Several of Mr. R.'s work-people were
  members of his class; and they went and informed
  Mrs. R. that they had enjoyed a most blessed oppor-
  tunity with me; the information sunk with grea
## 160
  weight into her mind, for she was at the time in great
  concern about the salvation of her soul, and very much
  distressed on account of her sins. On my return to
  her house, she said to me, "I have earnestly endea-
  voured to find rest for my soul; but there is no rest
  for me, Mrs. Elaw." We then kneeled down before
  the Lord in prayer for her, and He removed her burden
  and manifested His comforts to her spirit through faith
  in Christ Jesus. On the 17th, I went to Shelf, and
  visited my kind friends, Mr. and Mrs. B. I assisted in
  the anniversary sermons of the Primitive Methodists,
  visited a number of the friends, led several of their
  classes, and preached also in the Wesleyan chapel,
  where we enjoyed a very rich manifestation of the
  presence of God, and a delightful opportunity to
  our souls. I staid here a fortnight, passing the time
  very pleasantly in the family of Mr. B. I also visited
  frequently at Mr. G—ys; his wife is a very godly
  woman, whose adorning is not of the outward person,
  but of the hidden man of the heart, in that which is
  not corruptible; a meek and quiet spirit, which is in
  the sight of God of great price. This lady is one of
  the genuine daughters of Sarah; chaste in conversation,
  subdued in temper and reverent to her husband. Oh,
  that many flighty, petulant, high-minded and insubor-
  dinate wives, who profess the religion of Jesus, would
  pay more attention to the duties of Christian wives,
  and like this pious lady, adorn the doctrine of God
  their Saviour. Little Miss G, a child of ten years of
  age, had already savingly experienced that the Lord is
  gracious, and rejoiced in the God of her salvation, she
  manifested as grave and steady a deportment, as might
## 161
  have been expected from the years of a Christian
  matron.
¶ I returned to Huddersfield on the 11th of July, where
  I remained a few weeks; it is delightfully situated;
  being entirely surrounded with majestic hills, with
  several streams of water running through it, which con-
  duces much to the prosperity of its manufacturing
  enterprise. There are in this town four places of wor-
  ship belonging to the Episcopalians; two very large
  Wesleyan chapels, and two others occupied by the
  Primitive Methodists. The houses are neat, and chiefly
  built of stone; there are several bridges watering
  places and baths. It has a large market; and appears
  to be situated in a fruitful soil, abounding with fruit
  trees; the gardens are extensive and many of them
  tastefully laid out; and the approaches to it are by
  railway and good high roads. On the 29th, I again
  visited Hull, when I preached morning and evening to
  immense congregations; and afterwards we held a
  prayer-meeting; and the Lord blessed the word that
  day; many were comforted, and many others inquired
  "what must we do to be saved."
¶ On the 2nd of August, I embarked on board a steamer
  for London: there were a great many passengers on
  board; several of whom were from very widely distant
  parts of the earth. Some of the passengers requested
  me to preach to them, and the captain having given
  permission, we ascended the poop, and there held our
  meeting, which many persons seemed much inter-
  ested. One gentleman afterwards came and inquired
  my name, saying that he was about to write to his wife,
  and wished to give her an account of a meeting so
## 162
  interesting and so novel to the crew of a steam-ship. I
  arrived in London about six o'clock in the evening very
  much fatigued. On going to my friend's, Mr. T.,
  I found Mrs. T. was absent from home. I lodged that
  night at Mrs. F—'s; and the day following, I went to
  my former lodgings in Princes-square. My mind was
  somewhat cast down by these matters; for, notwithstand-
  ing the extensive exercises my faith has experienced,
  I am often too much a mere creature of circumstances.
¶ On the 7th I went to Great Queen-street chapel to
  hear Bishop Soul from America, and was very much
  fatigued with the length of the walk. My mind was at
  this time very cloudy and dark; and I formed the
  resolution to call upon and have an interview with the
  Bishop; but as I began to get myself ready for the
  visit, I was seized with a fearful tremour and loss of
  strength. I sunk down upon a chair, and pondered
  within myself the reason of this visitation, and it oc-
  currrd to me, that my design of going to the Bishop
  was taken without the permission of God being first
  obtained. I therefore abandoned this project, and the
  cloud on my spirit soon disappeared, and my peace
  was restored. Shortly afterwards, Mr. D—y came
  and engaged me to preach in Crosby Row chapel,
  Borough; Mr. G. engaged me to preach in his chapel,
  I also made an engagement to preach for Mr. P. and
  another to preach for Mr. O. in Whites-row chapel. I
  also preached in Timothy chapel, Ratcliff Highway, for
  Mr. B. and for many other ministers and congregations
  in other chapels, after fulfilling a host of engagements;
  and a variety of labour, I receiving an invitation from the
  north of England; and on the 27th of November I
## 163
  went on board a vessel for Berwick-upon-Tweed. We
  had a very boisterous passage; and, in the night, a
  gale of wind laid the vessel completely on her side.
  The passengers all concluded that we should soon be
  overwhelmed in a watery grave; but the Lord held our
  lives in His preserving care, and the vessel was got
  upright again. At eleven o'clock on the night of the
  30th, we came to anchor in the port of Berwick. I
  went ashore, the same night, to Mr. J. R—'s, the super-
  intendent, who very kindly received me; and thence
  retired to Mr. G—s. Many persons were converted to
  God under my ministry in this town; among the num-
  ber of whom, was Miss A. G.; she had been to chapel
  with me, and, on our return, several of the preachers
  accompanied us; before we parted, we kneeled down
  in prayer together, and the Lord then and there gave
  her the knowledge of salvation by the remission of sins.
  The town of Berwick is one of great antiquity: the
  people pointed out the remains of an old castle, which is
  said to have priority over the Christian era; also, the
  ruins of an old abbey of remote antiquity. The streets
  of Berwick, I was informed, have been drenched with
  human blood. There are several places of worship in
  the town belonging to different denominations; and
  the pasture fields in the vicinity are very beautiful and
  green. There is also an elegant pier, which is a con-
  venient promenade for the townspeople, and an exten-
  sive fishery. From this place, I went over to Holy
  Island, and preached to the fishermen, and enjoyed
  some very blessed meetings among them. This is a
  place of great antiquity, and was formerly inhabited by
  a great number of monks. On my return to Berwick,
## 164
  Mr. R. conducted me to Newcastle-upon-Tyne. I
  went from thence to Shields on the 25th of December,
  and reached there late in the evening; but my Hea-
  venly Father had been there before me, and prepared
  the way. A comfortable home was provided, and
  generous open hearts to receive the stranger at Mrs.
  T—s. When I arrived at her house, I was not aware
  that it had been arranged for me to lodge there. I
  therefore sat waiting to go I knew not whither. Mrs.
  T. bade me take off my out-doors apparel, at which
  I inquired if I was to stay there? and she replied, "Yes,
  this is your house as long as you stay in these parts;
  and we shall receive our reward in heaven." She then
  related how her mind had been exercised, until she
  came to the resolution to receive me under her roof.
  The Lord grant to this dear lady an hundred-fold more
  in this present time, and in the world to come, ever-
  lasting life. My labours here commenced on the 25th,
  in the new chapel. Mr. R. of Berwick, preached in
  the morning and evening, and myself in the afternoon:
  it was an auspicious commencement. On Monday, I
  attended a tea-meeting, which proved a very interesting
  time; and many excellent addresses were delivered by
  the speakers. After this, I went and preached at New-
  castle, and returned again to South Shields. The sphere
  of effort was enlarged before me, and in labours I be-
  came more abundant. In heat and cold, through wet
  and dry weather, by night and day, I laboured in that
  part of God's vineyard, preaching the gospel of Christ
  incessantly, wherever opportuuity was afforded me.
  One of the seals to my ministry here, was a descendant
  of Abraham, according to the flesh—a Jew outwardly,
## 165
  who; believing in the Lord with the heart unto righte-
  ousness, became a Jew inwardly also.
¶ The success of my ministry, in Shields, was very
  gratifying; bnt here as in many other places, I endured
  a considerable share of persecution from the opponents
  of female preaching; some opposing my ministry of
  mere caprice, and others from mistaken convictions.
  Satan never fails to find a pretext by which to inspire
  his agents with opposition against that ministry which
  is of God. While in this neighbourhood, I was sent for
  to visit a young man confined to his bed with mortal
  disease: though favoured with Christian parents, it
  appeared that when in health, he had indulged in sen-
  timents very inimical to revealed religion: subdued
  however by a sickness which exhausted his spirits and
  secluded him from the accustomed gaieties of life, he
  became susceptible of more serious impressions and of
  juster views. On my first visit to him, he was not only
  very weak in body, but very dark as to his perceptions
  of spiritual things. As I read the Scriptures, conversed
  with and opened to him the way of salvation, he was
  led to a discernment of the great atonement for sin in
  the cross of Jesus, and cried to the Lord for mercy: the
  Lord heard our united prayers, and spoke peace to his
  soul. He took refuge in the propitiation set forth by
  the Most High, became ustified by faith, and believing,
  found peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
  His surviving days were employed in the praises of Him
  who had called him out of darkness into His marvellous
  light; and he rejoiced in hope of the glory of God: the
  love of God was richly shed abroad in his heart by the
  Holy Ghost; and after languishing a few weeks more in
## 166
  the flesh, he found the rest which he sought; departing
  to be with Jesus, which is far better than a protracted
  abode among the ills of mortality.
¶ On the 28th of January, 1343, I preached again at
  Newcastle, on the opening of a chapel that had been
  long closed: but was now taken by the Ebenezer society
  for the cause of the Lord: the meetings were well at-
  tended; and I had the pleasure of knowing that some
  persons were converted to God therein. I generally
  found Newcastle a very barren and rocky soil to work
  upon; for the wickedness of the people is very great;
  and the cry of it, like the cry of Sodom, must ere long
  reach unto heaven; but nevertheless God hath a chosen
  remnant even there, whom He delights to bless; and I
  might enumerate many names here dear to me, whom I
  love for the truth's sake which dwelleth in them.
¶ On the 8th of September, I went to Rainton Hall;
  and preached on the following Lord's day to a numerous
  congregation in Middle Rainton; the place was filled
  with the glory of the Lord, and the people with the
  Holy Ghost; the next day we had a delightful tea
  meeting. On the 12th, I visited Colliery-road; passed
  the day at Mrs. L——s, took breakfast at Mr. R——s,
  and returned to preach at Rainton. Just before I went
  into the meeting, I was called in to see a sick woman,
  who related to me a remarkable vision which she had
  seen. On the 14th; I preached at Pittenton to a very
  large audience; and the meeting was attended with
  much power and spiritual assurance; after the service
  the friends presented me with a small sum of money for
  which I was thankful to my Heavenly Father. On the
  15th, I went to New Lampton, and was cordially re-
## 167
  ceived by Mr J. H——n: on the 15th, I preached to a
  large assembly, and on the next Lord's day I preached
  again to a dense mass of people, and held a prayer
  meeting after preaching. On retiring from that meeting,
  I was filled with the love of God too full to conceal my
  emotion, and I seemed to hear a concert of angelic
  voices singing the hymns of God in the air over my head.
¶ On the 19th, I went to Lumley, and preached in the
  new connexion chapel to a large and listening audience.
  It was a very solemn season; there being a very fatal
  distemper raging in the town at the time, which had
  prostrated many persons in death, and rendered their
  surviving relatives and friends so many bereaved
  mourners: the next day I returned to New Lampton,
  greatly exhausted by much travelling and preaching.
  On the 23rd, I went to Hettingly hole, and visited a
  young woman then dying, whose death occurred a few
  hours after. On the 24th, I preached in the Seceders
  Chapel to an immense throng of people; the vapours
  which arose from so compacted a concourse, as it con-
  densed, ran down the walls in streams of water; and I
  caught a severe cold on this occasion. On the 27th, I
  preached there again to another multitude: the day
  following I spent the afternoon at Mr. W——s, whose
  daughter, a widow, was dying: we bowed the knee in
  prayer to God for her; and I received the assurance
  that our petitions were granted: she spoke not, but
  when I arose, she took my hand, and looked at me
  with an affectionately languishing smile. On the 30th,
  I went to Colliery row, being in very bad health. I
  preached three sermons there, and likewise held a love
  feast; and taking a last farewell of my dear friends, I
## 168
  returned on the 4th of October to New Lampton, and
  on the 5th, preached at Newhottle, in the Wesleyau
  chapel; the friends connected with which expressed
  themselves greatly edified, invited me to preach there
  again on the following Lord's day, and gave me a ticket
  for their tea meeting of Monday. One of the brethren
  engaged early to inform me by note on what part of the
  Lord's-day I should occupy their pulpit; however, I
  received no note from him, and therefore I went not.
  On the Monday, having a ticket for their tea meeting;
  I went with several of my friends; but could not obtain
  admittance; for the interval from Saturday was too
  great for their memories: they had all forgotten me;
  nor was there one who was able to recognise the
  preacher who had so delighted them the previous week,
  they had probably received a philippic from some petty
  Authority against female preachers, which had blotted
  me out altogether from their thought and feeling. On
  my return in the evening, I was attacked with a very
  severe fit of illness, which confined me to my bed for
  five months; but my Heavenly Father was graciously
  pleased to make my consolations abound throughout
  this period of affliction; that dear lady Elizabeth
  Gardiner, was unremitting in her kind attentions to
  me, and with great benevolence administered to my
  necessities. Mr. A. gave proof of the constancy of his
  kindness, and sustained the burden of my sickness
  without prospect or desire of remuneration; the kind
  friends loved not in word only, but in deed and in
  truth: my medical attendant also was very assidious
  and kind.
¶ I have felt much gratitude to the Lord for enkindling
## 169
  so great a friendship for me in the bosoms of many
  persons in England; many of my English acquaintance
  possess a large share of my affections; and an imperish-
  able image in my memory; but I know by experience
  the heart of a stranger; many and deep and raging
  have been the billows of affliction which have rolled
  over my soul since I crossed the Atlantic Ocean. My
  reader may perceive that I have not been an idle spec-
  tator in my Heavenly Master's cause. During my so-
  journ in England, I have preached considerably more
  than a thousand sermons. I have expended all my
  means in travels of no little extent and duration; de-
  voted my time, employed the energies of my spirit,
  spent my strength and exhausted my constitution in the
  cause of Jesus; and received of pecuniary supplies and
  temporal remunerations in comparison with my time
  and labours a mere pittance, altogether inadequate to
  shield me from a thousand privations, hardships, target-
  fires, vexatious anxieties and deep afflictions, to which
  my previous life was an utter stranger.
¶ After an absence of six months, on my recovery, I
  returned to my kind friends in Shields, and the next
  day went to fulfil an engagement I had entered into
  when I was last there. As I proceeded to the place, I
  did not expect to return again alive, my exhaustion and
  debility was so extreme; but the Lord sustained me;
  and my strength was equal to my day. I preached four
  sermons in the space of three days, and returned more
  convalescent than I went. In a few months' time, I be-
  came fully occupied again in the work of the Lord, and
  continued my labours in Shields, Newcastle and Sunder-
  land until the month of July, 1844, when I bade my kind
  friends a final farewell, to see them no more until we
## 170
  meet in the kingdom of God. My last address to the
  dear friends in Shields was attended with a great sen-
  sation among the people, and was a very affecting season.
  On the 31st of July I left Shields, embarking at seven
  o'clock that evening on board a steam vessel for London.
  On my arrival in the port of London, I was met at
  the water side by my very kind friends, Mr. and Mrs. B.T.
  My soul truly rejoiced to meet my dear brethren and
  sisters in Christ of this metropolis once more in this vale
  of tears; and the Lord soon made my way clear on this
  my third visit to this great city. I have enjoyed much
  of the divine life in my soul since I have been here; my
  first residence was in Solomon's terrace, Back Road,
  St. George in the East; but I was obliged to leave
  it on account of the intemperate habits of one of its
  inmates. Drunkenness is an awful vice, and though
  debasing to both sexes, seems yet more unbecoming
  in a woman; it is a prolific parent of crime, being the
  origin of a thousand other evils. The Most High has
  strikingly reprobated this sin, by attaching to it the
  capital punishment of banishment from the kingdom of
  heaven. About the commencement of the present year,
  1845, I removed to the residence of Mr. T. Dudley, 19,
  Charter-house-lane, where I enjoy a comfortable home.
  I soon after visited Jewin-street chapel; and have cause
  for thanksgivings to God for directing me to that place
  of worship. My first visit to this chapel was on the
  watch night of the evening of December 31, 1844: I
  also attended at another meeting, commonly known
  among the Wesleyans as a covenant meeting, the object
  of which is a renewed dedication of our entire selves to
  the kingdom, service and glory of Christ. In a few
  evenings afterwards I joined Mr. Self's class; he is an
## 171
  able and experienced leader; I much enjoy and highly
  prize his judicious Christian counsel as a class leader:
  and feel a great attachment to each member of the
  class; I think the friends are growing in grace, in the
  knowledge of the truth, and increasing with the increase
  of the life of God. I esteem class meetings as a most
  wise and benevolent provision for the spiritual neces-
  sities of the saints; they appear somewhat to resemble
  the ancient church meetings of the primitive Christians
  which were instituted by the apostles; and might easily
  be vested with yet closer approximation to them, and
  increased powers of edification: such meetings greatly
  tend to preserve the purity and transparency of the
  renewed heart; there the weary soul is invigorated, the
  doubting mind confirmed, the dismayed heart encou-
  raged: the tempted are instructed, the heedless are
  admonished, and the lukewarm stimulated; the class-
  meeting is the place where the saints compare notes;
  and behold in each other's experience their own linea-
  ments and image.
¶ Let me exhort my dear Christian friends of every
  name and denomination, by no means to omit any pos-
  sible attendance on the means of grace, which are in-
  tended for their growth in the divine life and image; that
  they may not only hold fast where to they have attained,
  but become filled with the life and power, and display
  the perfection of the Christian religion; being the
  children of the resurrection, the sons of God, and
  receive an abundant entrance into the everlasting
  kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Slum-
  bering virgins, the Bridegroom cometh! Rouse timely
  to the midnight cry. I exhort all Christians, believ-
  ing that there is but one church of Jesus Christ
## 172
  in this wilderness; and I trust she will soon come
  forth as the morning, leaning on her beloved, fair as the
  moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as a bannered
  army. May all who are of the household of faith stand
  fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free.
  Dear brethren, the time is short, it is ominous, and it is
  perilous: be steadfast, unmoveable, always abounding in
  the work of the Lord. Be not carried about with every
  wind of doctrine; at the same time, reject not, nor fight
  against any statement of the Scriptures of truth, but with
  all confidence, aptitude and simplicity, as little children,
  receive and adopt all their inspired instructions. Mark, I
  beseech you, the signs of the times; they are awfully por-
  tentous: Christ's words are every where fulfilling, "Be-
  cause iniquity shall abound the love of many shall wax
  cold. Perilous times are verging upon us: He has asked
  the question, when the Son of man cometh will He find
  faith on the earth?" Alas, of outward profession there is
  abundance; but of true faith, a melancholy dearth.
  May we be prepared to answer this question for our-
  selves, by keeping our faith in continual exercise.
¶ I have now furnished my readers with an outline of
  my religious experience, ministerial labours and travels,
  together with some of the attendant results, both on the
  continent of America and in England: these humble
  memoirs will doubtless continue to be read long after
  I shall have ceased from my earthly labours and exist-
  ence. I submit them, dear Christian reader, to thy
  attentive consideration, and commend this little volume
  and each of its readers to the blessing of the adorable
  God, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Amen.
